    KAREN MACNEIL

THE WINE BIBLE
 REVISED SECOND EDITION
WORKMAN PUBLISHING | NEW YORK
               To Emma,
  who has taught me the meaning of love
              And to Harvey,
who has taught me the meaning of friendship
     And to the lesson of red tulips …
                       ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The process of writing a book involves a contradiction. For years, the writer breathes the
thin air of solitude and lives within the isolation of her own mind. Yet at the same time,
she is surrounded by hundreds of people without whose help—large and small—the book
simply would not be.
   Over the four years it took to research, write, and taste my way to this second edition of
The Wine Bible, I was helped by a group of smart, dynamic, dedicated wine pros who
conducted endless amounts of research, unearthed thousands of facts, tasted and evaluated
nearly 10,000 wines with me and were, in every way imaginable, the buttresses that
allowed The Wine Bible to be built.
ABOVE ALL WAS    Elizabeth Caravati, my assistant for the years during which I wrote the
second edition. Elizabeth was there with me in the writing trenches when the trenches got
very deep and numerous. For her brilliant mind, impeccable organization, and amazing
dedication, I will always be grateful.
ALONG WITH ELIZABETH,      a core team of talented wine pros worked tirelessly and
brilliantly on research, photos, wines, and support structure. I am deeply indebted to
Lauren Marsh Banks, Lauren Watters, Linda Schmitt, Alexandra Shimizu, Lauren
Cadwallader, Stacey Carlo, Rebecca Fletcher, Emma Thomas, Jessi Moyle, Elizabeth
Hemphill, Kort van Bronkhorst, Jacqueline Rogers, Jonathan Williams, Christina Hieb,
and Michael Hoefling. You are all extraordinary people whose hard work (and fantastic
palates) were indispensable.
OF COURSE NO BOOK     is ever really a good book without the deep belief and demands of an
editor and a publisher. To Suzanne Rafer, editor and visionary extraordinaire, thank you. I
am, as ever, grateful for your guiding grace and amazing intellect. And to the late, much-
missed Peter Workman—one of the titans of publishing and the first person who believed
in this book—I know you are right this moment in heaven, working on the real bible.
WHEN I HANDED OVER     the 4,000-something page manuscript, I held my breath. What
would it look like? Jean-Marc Troadec is a brilliant designer, and the fact that he fell in
love with the wines of Burgundy (and this project) was a great bit of luck for me. Michael
Dimascio, thank you for agonizing over the 1,500 photos we sent you and rounding up
even more. Sarah Brady—you’re the only person I can email at midnight saying, “Can
you fix the comma we messed up on page 923?” Enormous thanks, too, to Beth Levy for
guiding the manuscript through its many editing passes, and to Barbara Peragine for
perfecting the page layouts. Thanks also to Selina Meere, Chloe Puton, Jessica Wiener,
Moira Kerrigan, Doug Wolff, and David Schiller, and the whole fantastic team at
Workman Publishing—you’re the best.
ALL WRITERS WRITE   within a world created by their colleagues. The writers below are not
only friends—they are among the inspired people who have helped make the wine
industry rich and dynamic. Thank you to Gerald Asher, Andy Blue, Mary Ewing-Mulligan
MW, Antonio Galloni, Howard G. Goldberg, Evan Goldstein, Jim Gordon, Sarah Kemp,
Matt Kramer, Rick Kushman, Meredith May, Ed McCarthy, Elin McCoy, Jay McInerney,
Sophie Menin, Robert M. Parker, Lisa Perrotti-Brown MW, Andrea Robinson MS, Jancis
Robinson MW, Steven Spurrier, Brian St. Pierre, Terry Theise, Alder Yarrow, and Kevin
Zraly.
AND THEN THERE    were the hundreds of wine professionals who answered endless research
questions in painstaking detail, and photographers who provided us with stellar imagery.
FOR THEIR EXPERTISE,   professionalism, talent and sheer massive knowledge, I am thankful
to: Ana Abreu, Greg Allen, Janine Allen, Sao Anash, Holly Anderson, Maggie Anderson,
Gail Appleson, Travis Arnesen, Susan Auler, Christopher Barefoot, Xavier Barlier, Daniel
Baron, Alfredo Bartholomaus, Meaghan Becker, Didier Bedu, Danene Beedle, Jeremy
Benson, Marybeth Bentwood, Jennifer Berry, Bob Bertheau, Tania Bicknell, Anna
Boatwright, Angela Bortugno, Dr. Roger B. Boulton, Katia Braithwaite, Jennifer Brown,
Catherine Bugue, Kimberly Burfiend, Lacey Burke, Steve Burns, Karel Bush, Barbara
Cacao, George Caloyannidis, Robert Camuto, Jean-Louis Carbonnier, Kristen Carrillo,
Beth Cash, Doug Caskey, Kate Chaplin, Kimberly Charles, Pierre Cheval, Molly Choi,
Steffen Christmann, Andrea Mingfai Chu, Tracy Clark, John Concannon, Alex Conison,
Allison Conway, Rogelio Cortés Ricárdez, Tom Cosentino, Susan-Anne Cosgrove, Bobby
Cox, Eileen Crane, Jean-Charles Cuvelier, Allison Dallas, Eric Danch, Mark Davidson,
Sarah Davis, Eric Dench, Frank Dietrich, Sara Dirks, Joanne Dow, Yannick Doyard,
David Duncan, Jennifer Eckinger, Tom Elliot, Michèle Ellner, Maria Ferri, Michelle
Fleming, Véronique Foureur, Frederick Frank, Owen Franken, Jon Fredrikson, Lacey
Fussel, Linsey Gallagher, Robin Garr, Emil Gaspari, Axel Gillery, John Gillespie,
Anthony Gismondi, Marlène Gloaguen, Cécile Gonzalez, Charlotte Good, Penelope
Goodsall, Randall Grahm, Nigel Greening, Chryssa Gribabi, Shannon Gunier, Eva
Gurfein, Robert Haas, Barbara Handl, Timothy Hartley, Sam Heitner, Dr. Ed Hellman,
Oscar Henquet, Dr. Hildegarde Heymann, Robert Hill-Smith, Olivia Hoffman, Tom
Hogue, Gladys Horiuchi, Glenn Hugo, Patrick Hunt, Mitzi Inglis, Tim Irwin, Gene Ivester,
Elisabeth Jaubert, Karla Jensen, Christopher Jones, Magdalena Kaiser, Leon Karatsalos,
Vincenza Kelly, Lindsay Kelm, Molly Kennedy, Jane Kettlewell, Tina Kezeli, Sue Kibbe,
Dr. Aaron Kingsbury, Don Kinnan, Shae Kinsman, Chris Kissack, Kerstin Klamm, Suzie
Kukaj, Fran Kysela, Valerie Lailheugue, Kara Larmie, Jason Lett, Jeff Leve, Matthew
Levy, Nancy Light, Zach Long, Pedro Lopes Vieira, Kat Luna, Kermit Lynch, Avis
Mandel, Jeff Marazoni, Augusto Marchini, Jean-Pierre Mareigner, May Matta-Aliah,
Jarrod McCann, Sharron McCarthy, Patsy McGaughy, Stephanie McIntyre, Beth
McMahon, Dr. Carole Meredith, Jan Mettler, Janis Miglavs, Amber Mihna, Catherine
Miles, Arnie Millan, Alexia Moore, Christian Moya, Heather Muhleman, Megan Murphy,
Katrin Naelapaa, Jonathan Nahrgang, Charles Neal, Mariana Nedic, Grant Newton,
Heather Thompson Noll, Erica Nonni, Dieter Odendaal, Kathy O’Neal, Betty
O’Shaughnessy Woolls, Jennifer Pagano, Elpida Palamida, Marsha Palanci, Frédéric
Panaïotis, Sarah Papenfus, Lluís Pellejà Serra, Ryan Pennington, Sofia Perpera, Bridget
Perrault, Susan Piovesan, Thomas Pothmann, Marla Priest, Julie-Adele Provansal, Alain
Puginier, Erik Quam, Sona Rai, Alyssa Rapp, Linda Reiff, Dr. Thomas J. Rice, Georg
Riedel, George Rose, Louisa Rose, Monica Rosenthal, Leslie Rudd, Ronnie Sanders,
Carla Sarabia, Bethany Scherline, Emily Schindler, Meredith Schlacter, Thea Schlendorf,
Claire Schmitt, Frank Schulz, Marie-Louise Schÿler, Jami Segoria, Johannes Selbach,
Robert Shack, Doug Shafer, John Shafer, Hiram Simon, Monica Simpson, Katie Sims,
Nicki Sizemore, Anthony Smith, Jim Smith, Wendy Lane Stevens, Tom Stevenson, Sabine
Stock, Sherry Stolar, Guy Stout, David Strada, Jordi Suárez Baldrís, Jim Sweeney, Tracy
Sweeney, Rupert Symington, Dr. Ludger Tekampe, Clark Z. Terry, Elaine Testa, Stephanie
Teuwen, Karen Thornton, Lori Tieszen, Jim Trezise, Maru Valdés, Joanna Vlahos, Paul
Wagner, Teresa Wall, Karli Warner, Ross Wasserman, Belinda Weber, Rebecca Weber,
Wilhelm Weil, Diego Weiss, Shannon Wesley, Peter Weygandt, Bryce Wiatrak, Philippe
Wibrotte, Jen Wilkinson, Paul Woolls, Alan Zalayet and the Eisch Glass team, Annette
Zangrandi, and Joco Znidarsic.
                                 CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION: WHY WINE MATTERS
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK

MASTERING WINE
WHAT MAKES GREAT WINE GREAT?
WHAT MAKES WINE, WINE? THE BUILDING BLOCKS
WHERE IT ALL BEGINS
HOW WINE IS MADE
GETTING TO KNOW THE GRAPES
SENSUAL GEOGRAPHY: TASTING WINE LIKE A PROFESSIONAL
MARRYING WELL: WINE AND FOOD
THE TEN QUESTIONS ALL WINE DRINKERS ASK

FRANCE
BORDEAUX
CHAMPAGNE
BURGUNDY
BEAUJOLAIS
THE RHÔNE
THE LOIRE
ALSACE
LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON
PROVENCE
ARMAGNAC AND COGNAC

ITALY
PIEDMONT
THE VENETO
FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA
TUSCANY
OTHER IMPORTANT WINE REGIONS
 Trentino-Alto Adige
 Lombardy
 Liguria
 Emilia-Romagna
 Umbria
 Abruzzi
 The Southern Peninsula
 Sicily and Sardinia
SLOVENIA
SPAIN
RIOJA
RIBERA DEL DUERO
JEREZ
PENEDÈS
RÍAS BAIXAS
PRIORAT
OTHER IMPORTANT WINE REGIONS
 The Basque Region
 Bierzo
 Calatayud and Campo de Borja
 Castilla-La Mancha
 Jumilla
 Rueda

 Toro
PORTUGAL
PORT
MADEIRA
PORTUGUESE TABLE WINES

GERMANY
THE MOSEL
THE RHEINGAU
THE PFALZ
OTHER IMPORTANT WINE REGIONS
 Ahr
 Baden
 Franken
 Mittelrhein
 Nahe

 Rheinhessen
AUSTRIA
LOWER AUSTRIA
BURGENLAND
STYRIA
VIENNA

SWITZERLAND
HUNGARY
REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA
GREECE
THE UNITED STATES
CALIFORNIA
 Napa Valley
 Sonoma County
 Mendocino
 The Sierra Foothills
 The North Central Coast
 Livermore Valley
 Paso Robles and York Mountain
 The South Central Coast
WASHINGTON STATE
OREGON
NEW YORK STATE
TEXAS
VIRGINIA
OTHER IMPORTANT WINE REGIONS
 Arizona
 Missouri
 New Mexico
 Pennsylvania
 Idaho
 Michigan
 Colorado

 New Jersey
MEXICO
CANADA
AUSTRALIA
NEW ZEALAND
CHILE
ARGENTINA
SOUTH AFRICA
ASIA
CHINA
JAPAN
INDIA

WINE LAWS
GLOSSARIES
 Main Glossary
 French Wine Terms
 Italian Wine Terms
 Spanish Wine Terms
 Portuguese Wine Terms
 German and Austrian Wine Terms
 Hungarian Wine Terms

 Greek Wine Terms
THE 1855 CLASSIFICATION OF BORDEAUX
THE DOCGS OF ITALY
INDEXES
PHOTO CREDITS
                                INTRODUCTION
                        WHY WINE MATTERS
During the ten years it took to write the first edition of The Wine Bible and the four years it
took to write this second edition, I have often asked myself why wine matters. What is it
about wine that I hold so deeply? What is this endless attachment?
    I have always known what it is not. It’s not about scoring or competitive analysis,
though like any wine pro, I’m game for the next blind tasting. And it’s not about the need
to retell what I have learned, though I can lie awake for hours thinking about how to
capture a wine in words.
    Perhaps it is this: I love wine because it is one of the last true things. In a world
digitized to distraction, a world where you can’t get out of your pajamas without your cell
phone, wine remains utterly primary. Unrushed. The silent music of nature. For eight
thousand years, vines clutching the earth have thrust themselves upward toward the sun
and given us juicy berries, and ultimately wine. In every sip taken in the present, we drink
in the past—the moment in time when those berries were picked; a moment gone but
recaptured—and so vivid that our bond with nature is welded deep.
   Wine matters because of this ineluctable connection. Wine and food cradle us in our
own communal humanity. Anthropologically, they are the pleasures that carried life
forward and sustained us through the sometimes dark days of our own evolution.
   Drinking wine then—as small as that action can seem—is both grounding and
transformative. It reminds us of other things that matter, too: love, friendship, generosity.
   The Wine Bible has taken me a long time to write—in some ways I’ve spent the better
part of my last twenty years on it. It has taken this long not because it takes a long time to
accumulate the facts, but because it takes a long time to feel a place—culturally,
historically, aesthetically.
   And so, on my mission to understand the wine regions of the world, I’ve danced the
tango (awkwardly) with Argentinian men to try to understand malbec; drunk amarone
while eating horsemeat (a tradition) in the Veneto; sipped wine from hairy goatskin bags
in northern Greece (much as the ancients would have); and been strapped into a
contraption that lowers pickers down into perilously steep German vineyards (an
experience that momentarily convinces you your life is over).
   I’ve shared wine and cigars with bullfighters in Rioja; ridden through the vineyards of
Texas on horseback; eaten octopus and drunk assyrtiko with Greek fishermen in Santorini
(considered by some to be the lost Atlantis); and picked tiny oyster shells from among the
fossilized sea creatures that make up the moonscape soils of Chablis.
   I’ve waltzed among wine barrels with winemakers in Vienna; stomped grapes with
Portuguese picking crews until my legs were purple, and worked for weeks with a
Mexican harvest crew in California, one of the hardest and most rewarding experiences
I’ve ever had.
   These encounters brought wine so vividly into my life that I ultimately moved to Napa
Valley on the sheer belief that living near vines would touch my heart in ways imaginable
and not.
  And so it has.
                                                                        —Karen MacNeil
                     HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Every author writing about wine has to make decisions about what to include, what to
exclude (a harder choice), and how to present information that can be technical, complex,
or just plain messy in scope. Here are my decisions and the thinking behind them.
• WHERE TO BEGIN Acquiring knowledge about wine doesn’t usually occur in a linear
fashion and neither, I suspect, does reading about wine. So The Wine Bible is written in a
way that allows you to begin anywhere. You can, of course, start with the section I call
Mastering Wine, but if you want to read about Spain first, by all means, go ahead. Some
readers may read this work cover to cover, but you can also dip into it over time as your
fascination with a given topic, country, or type of wine takes hold.
• THE COUNTRIES AND THEIR MOST IMPORTANT WINES This second edition of The Wine
Bible covers every major wine region in the world and most of the minor ones. That said,
regrettably, because of lack of space, I was not able to include Israel, Turkey, Bulgaria,
Romania, or Croatia.
   For every major wine region that’s included, you’ll find a Most Important Wines box.
The wines listed are divided into Leading Wines and Wines of Note. My hope is that the
Most Important Wines boxes will give you a quick idea of the wines that most deserve
your attention. For example, if you’re going to Tuscany, which wines should you be sure
not to miss? Those are designated as Leading Wines. And which wines are absolutely
worth trying even though they aren’t as important as a Leading Wine? Those are the
Wines of Note.
• ABOUT THE WINES TO KNOW For every major country and every significant region within
it, there’s also a section called The Wines to Know. The Wines to Know are highly
personal choices that I recommend you try because I think they’ll tell you, within a few
sips, the story of that place in a way that words barely can. (Just as an aside, looking for
the wines that tell the story of a place is slightly different from looking only for “great”
wines that might score high in a critic’s notebook.) To arrive at the Wines to Know for this
edition of The Wine Bible, I tasted close to ten thousand wines. Still, finalizing the specific
wines to be included was often difficult, and I know I’ve left out some deserving wines.
    Most of the Wines to Know are available either from a wine retailer, directly from the
winery or via the Internet. Alas, because of high demand, a few wines may prove difficult
to locate through standard retail channels. I’ve included them anyway because you may
very well encounter them on a restaurant wine list or find them while traveling in wine
country.
• ABOUT VINTAGES The Wine Bible does not include information on specific vintages. Not
because vintages of a given wine aren’t different—of course they are—but my hope was
to present wines that are worth your knowing about in any vintage.
   I also hope that the whole concept of vintages is something that you’ll take in stride
because most vintages aren’t nearly as cut and dry, black or white, good or bad as they are
often made out to be. In this spirit, I hope you’ll find How Much Do Vintages Matter?
(page 124) evocative and worthy of consideration.
• ABOUT COST I also haven’t given prices in this book. That sort of information often
changes so rapidly that only newsletters, newspapers, magazines, and the Internet can
attempt to be accurate. But I have sometimes indicated that a wine is a steal, or moderately
priced, or super-expensive, and so on.
• ABOUT FOOD What would a wine book be without food—wine’s ineluctable companion?
I’ve included dozens of boxes and sections on the traditional foods of a given wine region.
Want to know the history of croissants? (Hint: The story doesn’t begin in France.) Or why
Sherry’s soulmate is tapas? Or why you need to eat chinchilla while drinking malbec in
Argentina? It’s all here. You’ll also find lots and lots of information on wine and food
marriages including a section in the Mastering Wine chapter outlining strategies for
pairing wine and food (page 115).
• ABOUT THE MAPS AND PHOTOS The maps created for this second edition are not overly
complex or overly simple. They include, I believe, what every wine lover needs to know
—that is, how wine regions relate to one another in terms of their locations. Each region
has a slightly different color shading, allowing you to easily tell them apart. (Note that the
color of the shading does not indicate the color of the wine in that region).
   Dozens of individuals helped me by sharing their photos—some were professional
photographers; others, wine pros on a wine country excursion. I thank them all for
allowing us to use their works. Their names are listed in the acknowledgments or in the
photo credits.
• ABOUT THE SEVEN GLOSSARIES In addition to a comprehensive general glossary of wine
terms in English, there are seven other glossaries for wine terms in other languages—a
glossary each for terms in French, Italian, Spanish, German and Austrian, Portuguese,
Hungarian, and Greek. So a word like cosecha (“vintage,” in Spanish) appears not in the
main glossary, but in the Spanish one.
• ABOUT GRAPE GENETICS This edition of The Wine Bible includes fascinating information
on the genetic parentage of all the leading grapes. In all cases, my information comes from
Dr. José Vouillamoz and the writers Jancis Robinson MW and Julia Harding MW.
• ABOUT STATISTICS There are several companies and organizations that track worldwide
wine statistics, but they often have widely differing formats and provide information that
is often not comprehensive. To maintain consistency throughout this book, my figures for
wine production and vineyard acreage come from the OIV, Organisation Internationale de
la Vigne et du Vin, and for consumption, from the Wine Institute. Both are highly
respected organizations.
• ABOUT NAMES, SPELLING, AND PUNCTUATION As seemingly prosaic as this topic is, it can
galvanize you as you attempt to write a book of this scope. Grape varieties are called
different things or spelled different ways in different countries. Throughout, I’ve tried to
be as clear as possible, always tipping you off about synonyms and local spellings. As for
punctuation, you’ll find that I’ve capitalized all wines that are named after places (this is
standard), and put all grape varieties (and wines named after grape varieties) in lowercase.
Thus in Piedmont, Italy, two of the leading wines are Barolo and barbera; the first capped
because it takes its name from a place, the second appearing in lowercase because it’s
named after the grape. The only exception to this practice is grapes named after people,
such as Müller-Thurgau and Palomino, both of which are capitalized.
• AND FINALLY, LEARNING MORE ABOUT WINE Some topics may be a bit boring to study. Not
wine. It’s quite possibly the most engaging, fun, and fascinating subject a learner could
ever want. I hope The Wine Bible plays a role in your process of understanding wine and
that you’ll also give wine courses and certification a try. WSET (Wine and Spirits
Education Trust), the Master Sommelier program, and the Society of Wine Educators are
all top-notch organizations that will help your study of wine develop and evolve. In
addition, there are countless wine courses and wine schools in cities large and small
around the world. Happy tasting.
Wine has a way of pulling you into it—of making you want to taste and experience more.
                                                 MASTERING WINE


WHAT MAKES GREAT WINE GREAT?

Most wine books begin with what wine is, how it’s made, where it comes from. And we’ll
definitely get into each of those.
   But I wanted to lead off the first section of The Wine Bible with the bottom line, the big
question, and the final paradox: What makes great wine great? Intentionally or not, many
of us spend our entire “wine lives” tasting in pursuit of the answer (or answers), and it’s a
delicious journey to be sure. But it seems to me that this, the most intriguing of important
wine questions, also deserves some thoughts put down on paper. So to begin, in this
chapter I’ll share mine. From there, we’ll get down to the specifics, and I’ll take you
through all the essentials: what wine is; the building blocks that make it taste the way it
does; the stunning role that place plays in a wine’s flavor; how wine is made; the
professional method of tasting in a way that magnifies a wine’s flavor; the vast world of
grape varieties and how to get to know them; pairing wine with food; plus all the practical
particulars, from how to feel more comfortable in a wine shop to how to choose the best
wineglasses to how to know when a wine is ready to drink.
    A final thought: When I was first learning about wine, I remember thinking that wine
wouldn’t be so hard to understand if I could just find someone to explain it well. Above
all, I wanted to understand the concepts in this chapter—the concepts that give each of us
the grounding we need to think about wine more meaningfully and know it better. I hope I
can be that good explainer for you. For it’s by understanding this chapter—wine in all of
its magnificent, paradoxical, and elemental details—that we enhance our awe and
enjoyment of what is, after all, the world’s most captivating beverage.
Among wine’s central mysteries: How is it that mere grapes can become a beverage of profound depth and complexity?
                             How is it that this simple fruit can tell the story of a place?
            THE NINE ATTRIBUTES OF GREATNESS

No one needs a wine book to tell them what they like to drink. Subjectivity in wine is
pretty easy. But a wine is not great merely because we like it. Liking a wine is simply
liking a wine—it tells you something about what you take pleasure in.
   I would argue that to really know wine—and to consider its potential greatness—
requires that we move beyond what we know we like. It requires that we attempt a larger
understanding of the aesthetics behind wines that have garnered respect, wines that have
consistently been singled out for their merit, wines that have, again and again over time,
been cherished for their integrity and beauty. I’ll call this our best attempt at wine
objectivity. And by attempting to objectively understand wine, we begin to inch toward
the underlying principles that make great wine great.
   Like literature, then, wine encourages two assessments: one subjective, the other,
objective. You may not like reading Shakespeare, but agree nonetheless that Shakespeare
was a great writer. You may have loved that carafe of wine in the Parisian café… and yet
know that it was not, in the end, a great wine.
   What does it take to have as objective an opinion as possible about a wine?
Discernment, an open mind, and usually some experience in repeatedly tasting the wine so
you have a feel for how it classically presents itself. Experience with the wine is, I think,
especially critical. My own best example of this is Sherry. The first time I tasted Sherry I
envisioned writing an article called “Death by Sherry.” I could not imagine why anyone
would drink the stuff.
   Today, I consider Sherry one of the greatest wines in the world, and it has become one
of my favorites. By tasting it over and over again with “the willing suspension of
disbelief” (to borrow a literary concept), I came to a closer understanding of it. One day
while tasting it, the light switched flipped. In that moment, I “got” Sherry. Many, many
wines require this sort of pursuit. (As do foods. Who can say they had a good idea of how
to evaluate sushi the first time they tasted it?)
   So, open-minded tasting experience is key. Assembling all that experience is also the
fun part. After years of doing that, here are the nine attributes that I believe matter most in
determining whether a wine is great: distinctiveness, balance, precision, complexity,
beyond fruitness, length, choreography, connectedness, and the ability to evoke an
emotional response.

DISTINCTIVENESS
In the simplest sense, consider: If you buy a Granny Smith apple, you want it to taste like
one. If it tastes simply generic—like any old apple—you’d probably be disappointed. In
fact, the more Granny Smithish the Granny Smith apple is, the more it can be appreciated
and savored for what it is. Great wines are great because they are distinctive; not because
they exhibit sameness. This is true first of all for wines based on single grape varieties.
Each variety of grape presents itself in an individual way (see Getting to Know the
Grapes, page 53). Wines that fully and precisely express those individual grapes are said
to have “varietal character.” A good thing. (As a quick aside and perhaps needless to say,
not all varietal characteristics have mass appeal. Some wine drinkers, for example, think
the edgy, “wild girl,” tangy green herb character of some sauvignon blancs is hard to love.
And indeed it can be. But think about cheese. Just because some people cannot bear
intensely flavored cheese, is blue cheese awful? Should every cheese be remade in the
image of American singles? I hope not.)
    Then there are wines that are blends, including many of the most remarkable types of
wine in the world: Champagne, Bordeaux, Rioja, Chianti, Châteauneuf-du-Pape—and
many others. A blend does not, cannot, demonstrate varietal character. But it should
demonstrate distinctiveness. Tasting a great Châteauneuf-du-Pape should tell you above
all that this is a Châteauneuf-du-Pape and cannot be anything else. (And, of course, we’ll
address what great Châteauneuf-du-Pape tastes like in the Rhône Valley section of the
French chapter.)
   Finally, great wines are distinctive not only in their aromas and flavors, but also
distinctive in their textures. Great wine does not lie amorphously on the palate. It has a
feel that is exciting. That feel can be as soft as cashmere, as minerally as mountain water,
as brisk and crisp as fresh lime juice, or as downy as falling snow (which is the texture of
many great Champagnes). The nature of the texture doesn’t matter. What’s important with
great wine is that it have a discernible and distinctive texture.
   In the end, distinctiveness is perhaps the highest attribute of great wine. It’s the sense
that this wine could not be just anything; it is something.

BALANCE
One of the most commonly used words to describe a great wine is balance, along with its
cousin, integration. The two words mean slightly different things. Balance is the
characteristic a wine possesses when all of its major components (acid, alcohol, fruit, and
tannin) are in equilibrium (see What Makes Wine, Wine?, page 9). Because no single
component sticks out more than any of the others, a balanced wine has a kind of
harmonious tension of opposites. I often think of a Thai soup when I think of balance.
Sweetness, heat, acidity, spice—they’re all there in perfect contrapuntal tension with one
another, and as a result the soup tastes harmonious.
      “Great wine is about nuance, surprise, subtlety, expression, qualities that keep
      you coming back for another taste. Rejecting a wine because it is not big
      enough is like rejecting a book because it is not long enough, or a piece of
      music because it is not loud enough.”
                                                             — KERMIT LYNCH,
                                                        Adventures on the Wine Route

   Integration takes this concept one step further. When a wine is integrated, its
components and flavors have coalesced in a way that seems almost magical. Instead of
various components and flavors that are all separate and discernible, an integrated wine
possesses a unique and stunning character that comes from the synthesis of the
independent parts. A wine that is balanced when young has the potential to become
integrated when it’s older.
   Balance or integration is essential in great wine. That said, they are difficult
characteristics to describe. Wine that is not balanced or integrated is far easier to talk
about. It presents itself like a broken star on the palate, with a few points sticking out.
When oakiness is out of balance, for example, it’s easy to taste because, from a sensory
perspective, it sticks out like a sore thumb. It’s worth noting that great wines usually leave
wine critics literally speechless.

PRECISION
Great wines do not have flavors that are muddled or blurry. Great wines have flavors—
whatever those flavors are—that are precise, well defined, and expressive. Imagine an old-
style radio where you can dial in the frequency. If you don’t adjust the dial perfectly, you
can still hear the music, but its integrity is lost in static. When you get the frequency just
right, the music takes on a special beauty because it is precise.
   Interestingly, sensory scientists often analogize flavor to sound. Is flavor X a whisper
or a shout?, they will ask in an experiment. Using this as a metaphor, I would offer that a
great wine has a flavor that is the precision equivalent of a church bell in the mountains.
    Given two well-made wines from two above-average vineyards in the same good year,
it is not clear why one wine might be more precise in flavor than the other. There are many
ways in which winemaking could be at fault (overhandling a wine, for example, can
discombobulate it; too much oak could blur its flavors). But it is also well known that
certain vineyards, mostly year in and year out—for reasons immensely complex to fathom
—simply produce precise wines.

COMPLEXITY
Wines fall along a spectrum from simple to complex. Simple wines are monochromatic in
flavor and monodimensional in appeal. They may be delightful, but in a sense they have
only one thing to say.
  By comparison, complex wines have multifaceted aromas and flavors—and here’s the
most important part: Those layers of aroma and flavor reveal themselves sequentially over
time. Tasting a complex wine is a head trip. Just when you think you’ve grasped the
flavors, the kaleidoscope turns and new flavors emerge, revealing different facets of the
wine. A complex wine is therefore not knowable in one sip. A complex wine almost pulls
you into it, compelling you to take sip after sip in order to understand it (or at least follow
what’s going on!). I like to think that, as humans, we are somehow hardwired to like
complexity; that the not-knowing-what-is-coming-next quality of a thing is inherently
gravitational.

      “There’s volumes to be said for a wine that takes you three glasses to decide
      whether you find it compelling or repellent.”
                                                — EVAN AND BRIAN MITCHELL
                                                         The Psychology of Wine
                                LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD
 “One day her mother said to her, ‘Come, Little Red Riding Hood, here is a piece of cake and a bottle of
 wine. Take them to your grandmother, she is ill and weak, and they will do her good.’”
                                                                                        — “ROTKÄPPCHEN”
    (Little Red Riding Hood, or Little Red-Cap) printed in Kinder und Hausmärchen, a collection of German
                                                    fairy tales first published in 1812 by the Brothers Grimm
     In 1989 and 1990, two California school districts, in Culver City and Empire, respectively, banned this
                                version of the tale over concern about the mention of alcohol in the story.

   It’s important to note that complex wines don’t have to be powerful, full-bodied wines.
As Jurgen Wagner, the winemaker of Capçanes winery in Spain, once said to me, “If
someone tells me a wine is fragile, I consider it a good thing. Fragility is complex. I love
introverted wines because, like introverted people, they know they are good; they don’t
have to show off.”

BEYOND FRUITNESS
The description “fruity” has become such a positive in the past two decades that what I’m
about to suggest may seem surprising, even sacrilegious. But the fact remains: The great
wines of the world are not merely fruity. Fruitiness alone often comes off in a juvenile,
sophomoric way—like wearing an all-pink dress. Great wines go beyond fruit and are
woven through with complicated aromas and flavors—things like tar, bitter espresso,
roasted meats, blood, worn leather, exotic spices, minerals, rocks, wet bark, and dead
leaves, to name a few. These beyond-fruit characteristics give wine an even broader and
deeper sensory impact and make it more intellectually stimulating.

LENGTH
The persistence of a wine on your palate, even after you’ve swallowed, is called its length
or finish. The better the wine, the longer the length. By contrast, the flavor of a common
wine disappears almost as soon as you swallow it. (This can be a blessing.)
   In Sensual Geography: Tasting Wine Like a Professional (page 101), I talk about the
method professionals use to get a good sense of the length. But here I simply want to state
the importance of long persistence on the palate as a hallmark of great wines.
   As an aside, no one knows why certain wines possess a long finish. Is it a vineyard
characteristic? Something about certain vintages? A quality associated with physiological
states like ripeness? There is no definitive thinking on this.

CHOREOGRAPHY
Since writing the first edition of The Wine Bible (2001), I have thought a lot about this
aspect of great wine. Yet, what I’m about to describe has no agreed-upon language.
Indeed, it’s virtually never addressed in wine books. It’s an added facet that great wine
appears to possess—a kind of fifth dimension. To me, that extra dimension might be
thought of as the choreographic character of a wine—the way its flavors appear to move
physically and spatially. Does the wine appear to “grow” or blossom in the mouth? Does
the wine almost attack the palate with explosive flavors, then crescendo and fade out in a
slow ooze? Does the wine move with broad, sweeping brushstrokes? Or is it precise and
pointillistic, like the tiny dots in certain Impressionist paintings? As my friend the
importer Terry Theise would say, does it feel like Swedish massage or shiatsu?
    One thing would appear true: The finest wines are multidimensional on the palate.
There are wavelengths of flavor, force, volume, and velocity. In my experience, when the
fifth dimension of a wine is spellbinding, you’re in the midst of a great wine.

CONNECTEDNESS
Connectedness is perhaps the most elusive of these concepts and the most difficult quality
to ascertain. It is the sense you get from the wine’s aroma and flavor that it is the
embodiment of a particular place. Connectedness is the bond between a wine and the land
it was born in.
   Connectedness, like cultural identity, makes a thing different from other things and
therefore worthy of appreciation. It was, for example, innately satisfying when, not so
long ago, Frenchmen still wore berets, when you could find only olive oil (not butter) in
the south of Italy, when Spanish children were given wine-dipped bread sprinkled with
sugar as a snack. Each of these things, small as they were, revealed the links between
people and their cultures and homes. Wine without connectedness to the ground from
which it came may be of good quality but, like a chain hotel in Rome, there is a limit to
how deep one’s aesthetic appreciation of it can be.
   Connectedness, though hard to describe, is easy to find. Try a Côte-Rôtie (syrah) from
the northern Rhône, with its almost savage peppery, gamey flavors, or a shimmeringly tart
riesling from the Mosel region of Germany. Neither of these wines could come from
anywhere other than the place it did.

ABILITY TO EVOKE AN EMOTIONAL RESPONSE
This is the final hallmark of greatness and, in many ways, it’s the combined result of
everything I’ve talked about so far. Great wines incite emotion. They stop you in your
tracks. Send chills down your spine. Make you write things like “oh my God” as a tasting
note.
   Great wines appeal not only to the intellect; they have the rare power to make us feel.
Throughout its history, wine has always been a communal beverage. Drinking it implies sharing, generosity, and
                    friendship. There’s a reason wine is rarely sold in single-serving bottles!
Wine is, of course, more than the sum of its parts. But today all wineries have laboratories to analyze a wine’s
                                                  components.
WHAT MAKES WINE, WINE? THE BUILDING BLOCKS

For all of wine’s complexity, it is born of something utterly simple: a grape. A grape berry
is, by weight, 75 percent pulp, 20 percent skin, and 5 percent seeds (there are usually two
to four of them). Pulp is the soft, juicy center of the grape, and is what will become the
wine. Mostly water and, after that, sugar, the pulp of a ripe grape contains minuscule
amounts of acids, minerals, and pectin compounds, plus a trace of vitamins. It’s the sugar
in the pulp that is crucial to vinification, since it’s the sugar that will be converted to
alcohol. As for the skins, they get to play the sexy part. They’re largely responsible for the
wine’s aroma and flavor, as well as its color and tannin, the compound that makes some
wines feel slightly dry and taste bitter (more on this soon). But a bunch of grapes has a
way to go before it can be called wine. And once it’s transformed, there will be several
components to consider: alcohol, acid, tannin, fruitiness, and dryness and sweetness.
These are the structural building blocks of any wine. Let’s look at each of them.

                                            HANG TIME
         Let’s say a grape variety normally takes 120 days to ripen. In an especially hot year, it
         may ripen after only 100 days; in a cooler year, after 130 days. Which situation would a
         viticulturist prefer? All other things being equal, viticulturists want a long growing
         season. Long ripening (a long hang time) allows components in the grape other than
         sugar—tannin, for example—to reach greater physiological maturity. Fully developed
         grapes, of course, hold more promise for a wine with fully developed flavors.
         Historically, perfectly ripe grapes that took a long time getting ripe often produced
         superior wines with more complex aromas and flavors. (For complexity, I always
         imagine the deep flavor of freshly squeezed orange juice from ripe oranges versus the
         shallow flavor of powdered mixes.) There’s one important distinction here. Long hang
         time in the pursuit of ripeness (a good thing) is not the same as overripeness (a bad
         thing). When a wine has all the charm of prune juice crossed with flat cola, it isn’t pretty.


ALCOHOL
Alcohol is a critical constituent in wine, not because of the genial mood it can evoke
(although that’s surely part of its charm), but rather because of the complex role it plays in
the wine’s structure, and the profound effect it can have on aroma and flavor. Alcohol
occurs in wine as a result of yeasts. During fermentation, a yeast cell takes one sugar
molecule in the grape pulp and turns it into two ethanol (alcohol) molecules. In the
process, two carbon dioxide molecules and some heat are thrown off. (Tiny amounts of a
few byproducts are also created. One of the most important of these is glycerol, which
gives wine a sweetness and may contribute a slightly viscous, mouth-coating texture.) The
more sugar the grapes contain (that is, the riper they are), the higher the alcohol content of
the final wine will be.
   How does alcohol manifest itself in the wine? First and most important, alcohol
determines the body of the wine. Quite simply: The more alcohol, the fuller the body.
Thus, high alcohol wines feel weighty on the palate. They are the sensory equivalent of
heavy cream, not skim milk. By comparison, very low-alcohol wines are so light in body
they almost seem weightless (dry German rieslings are a good example).
   Alcohol can also influence aroma and flavor. In a wine with very high alcohol, the
aromas of the wine may be masked by the more dominant smell of the alcohol. What we
call alcohol’s aroma is actually more of a nasal burn. Put your nose directly over a bottle
of rubbing alcohol and you’ll probably instinctively and quickly want to turn away. When
a wine has so much alcohol that all you get when you smell it is the burn, the wine is said
to be “hot.”
   As for taste, alcohol can impact wine in two ways that are negative. First, high alcohol
can mask the flavors of the wine, rendering them virtually meaningless because you can’t
taste them anyway. Second, a wine that’s very high in alcohol is a wine that has come
from very ripe grapes. If the grapes are so ripe they border on raisins, the wine can have a
dull, “overcooked” fruit character. In the worst cases, very high-alcohol wines can come
with flavors that are so mind-numbing and lifeless, one might as well mix grape jam with
vodka and call it a day.
    You notice I keep qualifying the alcohol as being “very” high. There is no agreement
on what defines this. Moreover, it’s true that the impression of alcohol may be mitigated
by a significant level of other components—tannin, acidity, and fruit. All of this said, my
sense is that many wine professionals (including me) would argue that once a table wine
exceeds 15 percent alcohol by volume, the chances of it being elegant, being reflective of
its place, and being distinctive, diminish considerably.




Today, ripe grapes the world over are generally picked quickly and put into small, squat boxes so that the weight of the
                              grapes on top won’t crush or bruise the fruit underneath.


ACID
As a grape ripens, its acid content decreases from around 3 percent usually to less than 1
percent, and its sugar content increases from 4 percent usually to more than 24 percent.
The challenge is to harvest precisely when an optimal balance between the two is struck,
for acidity is critical to the final balance, flavor, and feel of the wine.
   Acidity gives wine liveliness, snappiness, freshness, and, to a certain extent, makes it
thirst quenching. Acidity also “frames” the fruit, and gives the wine a sense of precision
and clarity.
   Without a sufficient amount of acidity, a dry wine seems languid, dull, flabby,
amorphous, and flat. A sweet wine that doesn’t have enough acidity will, in addition, taste
overly saccharin and candied. In the end, having just the right amount of acidity is as
pivotal in wine as it is in lemonade (actually more so).
    Another concern: Wines that lack acidity do not age well and may be susceptible to
spoilage. The vast majority of California and Australian chardonnays, for example, are not
candidates for long keeping precisely because of their fairly low acidity. In fact, in warm
wine regions where grapes quickly lose their natural acidity, winemakers commonly
“adjust” the acid by adding 2 to 3 grams of tartaric acid per liter (.2 percent to .3 percent)
to the fermenting wine. (Tartaric acid is one of the natural acids in grapes). Small as it is,
this bit of natural acid can help a wine taste more focused.
   But there’s more to acidity than just the amount. While we have no good language to
describe acidity in depth, many pros agree that what’s important about acidity is not just
the quantity but the quality of it. For example, German winemakers (acid experts if ever
there were any), distinguish between harsh acidity (the sensory equivalent of shattering
glass), round acidity (harmonious crispness), and candied acidity (the sweet, crystalline
taste of powdered sour candies or drinks like Crystal Light).
   One type of acidity, volatile acidity (often called V.A.), is not an inherent part of the
grape, but instead is acetic acid formed by bacteria during or after fermentation. A tiny
amount of volatile acidity is neither harmful nor perceptible. If, however, the bacteria are
exposed to air and allowed to multiply, the resulting volatile acidity will make the wine
smell vinegary and taste somewhat dank and sour. A wine with very noticeable volatile
acidity is considered flawed.

                                          NICE LEGS…
         The rivulets of wine that roll down the inside of the glass after a wine has been swirled
         are called legs in the United States, Canada, and Britain. The Spanish call them tears;
         the Germans, church windows. Some wine drinkers look for great legs, falsely believing
         that nicely shaped legs (and who knows what that means?) portend great flavor. In fact,
         legs are a complex phenomenon related to the rate at which liquids evaporate and the
         difference in surface tension between the wine’s water and alcohol contents. Legs have
         nothing to do with greatness.
            With wine, as with women, there is very little meaningful information one can deduce
         by looking at the legs.


TANNIN
Tannin is among the most intellectually intriguing components in wine. The amount of
tannin, its physiological maturity, and the extent to which it is counterbalanced by other
building blocks can all contribute to (or detract from) a wine’s greatness, structure, and
ageability.
   Plants build tannins for protection, preservation, and defense. (Since Neolithic times,
plant tannins have been used to prevent the spoilage of animal skins—when “tanning”
hides into leather, for example). Tannin belongs to a class of complex compounds called
phenols and comes primarily from the grapes’ skins and seeds (stems, too, have tannin, but
stems usually are not used in winemaking). Because red wines are fermented with their
skins, and whites are not, tannin is a consideration primarily with red wines.
   To begin with, different varieties of grapes are predisposed to having different amounts
of tannin. Cabernet sauvignon, for example, generally has a lot of tannin; pinot noir has
comparatively little.
   What does tannin do for a wine? It provides two things: structure and ageability.
Structure—which, in wine, is difficult to describe—is the sense that the wine has an
underlying “architecture.” The French sometimes refer to structure as the skeleton or
backbone of the wine. With a well-defined structure, a wine takes on a certain
formidableness and beauty. Structured wines feel impressive on the palate. Tannin is also,
as just noted, a natural preservative. All other things being equal, wines with significant
amounts of tannin live longer than wines without. Look at any collector’s cellar and
you’re likely to see wines like cabernet sauvignon and Bordeaux—wines that have a lot of
tannin and therefore have a good chance of living well into the future.
    From a sensory standpoint, tannin has both a taste and a feel. The taste of tannin is
bitterness—good bitterness, like espresso or dark chocolate. The feel of tannin is
astringency or dryness. When tannin in the grapes is physiologically mature or “ripe,” the
feeling of dryness in the final wine is slight, and the taster simply senses that the wine has
a commanding structure. If, on the other hand, the tannin in the grapes is completely
unripe, the dryness in the wine can be so gripping and harsh it feels like your palate has
been shrink-wrapped. If you’ve ever bitten into an unripe persimmon, you know the
severely drying, puckery feeling of immature tannin.

                                       THE TANNIN TABLE
    Below is my view of how various major red grape varieties compare in the amount of tannin they generally
    display. Climate, place, and factors such as vine yield, vine age, and winemaking can shift these
    relationships a bit. But in general, I think, this is a good guide.




   So, what causes tannin to be ripe or unripe? In a word: sun. As grapes become ripe, in
general, the sugar in them builds, the acidity drops, and slowly the tannin matures.
  Imagine the ideal situation: Sugar would build just enough to provide ripe (but not
overripe) fruit flavors in the final wine; the acidity would drop but not disappear
(remember, some acidity is essential); and the tannin would evolve from something harsh-
feeling to mellow. Alas, it’s difficult to get this timing down perfectly. Say, for example,
bad weather forces a vintner to pick his grapes before the tannin has had a chance to
mature fully. The wine he makes in this case will certainly be drinkable—even, perhaps,
enjoyable. But it will definitely have a rough grip to it. The vinous equivalent of Clint
Eastwood with a five-o’clock shadow.
     THE CLINT EASTWOOD FIVE-O’CLOCK-SHADOW EFFECT
 Why does tannin sometimes come across with such grip? Why is it sometimes so drying? Short of an
 organic chemistry course, here’s what’s happening. Tannin molecules in wine are hugely attracted to the
 protein in saliva (of which there is a copious amount). In effect, it’s not that tannin itself is drying. It’s that
 saliva, bound up by tannin molecules, can no longer lubricate the palate, and as result, your mouth
 tissues rub against one another, causing your palate to feel dry. At this point, the story gets complex, and
 chemists aren’t sure what happens to tannins to cause some of them to glide over the palate (causing
 you to perhaps describe the wine as “silky”). Do tannin molecules get longer and slip more easily across
 the palate? Until recently, scientists thought so. But new research describes tannin as complex structures
 that form, re-form, and combine with all manner of other molecules, sometimes with soft, tactile results.
 In the end, no one is sure why some wines come across as Clint Eastwood with a five o’clock shadow.

    Critical as ripe tannin is to the final texture of the wine, you’d think there would be a
hightech way to test grapes to see if the tannin is ripe. There isn’t. The only device that
exists is the oldest tool of all: one’s senses. Watch a winemaker as harvest approaches, and
if that winemaker makes red wine, it’s a sure bet he walks the vineyards constantly, tasting
hundreds of grape berries and squeezing them open to look at the seeds. The seeds turn a
nutty brown as the tannin ripens. But most important, he’s tasting for that moment when
the feel of the grape skins changes, when the tannin switches from unripe to ripe.
   For any good taster, then, there are two dimensions to consider when thinking about
tannin in a wine. First, how much tannin does one perceive? Second, what is the quality,
or ripeness, of that tannin?
   Finally, the perception of tannin can be changed by food. In other words, to some
extent tannin can be “solved” by a lamb chop. For more thoughts on this, see Marrying
Well: Wine and Food, page 115.

FRUITINESS
As the word suggests, fruitiness is simply the propensity of a wine to display ripe, fruitlike
aromas and flavors. Fruitiness is most marked in young wines and is rarely found in
mature ones. Some varieties—gewürztraminer and gamay, for example—are
characteristically very fruity. Gewürztraminer, a white wine made notably in the Alsace
region of France, has effusive lychee aromas and flavors; drinking gamay (the red grape of
Beaujolais) is like diving into a pool of black cherries. Fruitiness is often confused with
sweetness, but the two are distinctly different.
                             HOW SWEET IT IS (OR ISN’T)
 Amazingly, there is no international, or even national, consensus on the meaning of terms like dry, off-dry,
 medium dry, medium sweet, semisweet, and so on. In 2002, the European Union did legislate the
 definition of some of these terms. But the definitions depend on the wines’ acidity levels. So, for example,
 a “dry” European wine cannot have any more than .4 percent residual sugar, unless that wine has
 “suitable acidity,” in which case it can have up to .9 percent residual sugar and still be considered dry.
 From a taste perception standpoint, this does make sense; but it also makes it next to impossible to
 grasp where one term ends and another begins. In the United States and much of the New World,
 producers decide for themselves what terms to use and what those terms mean. The only simple
 guideline in the U.S. (and it’s not law) is suggested by the Sweet and Fortified Wine Association. Here
 are their definitions:
 DRY: Less than .5 percent residual sugar
 OFF-DRY: .5 percent to 1.9 percent residual sugar
 SEMISWEET: 2 percent to 6 percent residual sugar
 SWEET: More than 6 percent residual sugar
    Note that if these definitions were legally adopted in the United States, most chardonnays would
 probably need to be labeled “off-dry.”


DRYNESS AND SWEETNESS
Dryness is a funny word to apply to wine, which, after all, is wet. But in the world of
wine, dry means that the wine has no more natural grape sugar that could be converted
into alcohol during fermentation. (Don’t confuse the term dry here with the idea of a wine
displaying a drying or astringent sensation as a result of tannin.) If a wine has any natural
grape sugar left—that is, if some of the sugar was not converted to alcohol during
fermentation—then the wine is said to have residual sugar. Importantly, a little bit of
residual sugar does not necessarily make the wine as sweet as dessert wine. In fact, most
of us would not be able to detect a small amount of residual sugar in wine. A lot of so-
called “dry” California chardonnays, for example, actually have a little residual sugar to
make them taste mellow. Ironically, of course, many people swear they like only dry wines
(even while happily drinking one of those chardonnays). In fact, the presence of sweetness
in beverages appears to be uniquely a wine problem. After all, no one says, “I don’t want
any sweetness in my Coke.” (Colas, by the way, clock in at about 11 percent residual
sugar; most wines that you’d have with dinner would be 0 to perhaps 2 percent residual
sugar.)
 In the “quiet” winter months after the harvest, wineries are busy analyzing and repeatedly tasting the different lots of
       wine that they’ve fermented. Preliminary blends—often many dozens of them—will be painstakingly made.

       Colas, by the way, clock in at about 11 percent residual sugar; most wines that
       you’d have with dinner would be 0 to perhaps 2 percent residual sugar.

    In order to be considered a sweet wine (not a dinner wine), a wine has to have quite a
lot of residual sugar. According to European Union legislation, for example, a wine
labeled sweet must have at least 4.5 percent residual sugar. Most of Europe’s great sweet
wines, however, have considerably more than that. Port, for example, generally has
approximately 8 percent residual sugar; Sauternes, 10 to 15 percent; German
trockenbeerenauslesen (TBAs), as much as 30 percent; and some of Spain’s fabled,
opulent Pedro Ximénezes have over 40 percent residual sugar.
    There are also several notable styles of wine where a tiny bit of sweetness is critical to
balance the poignancy of the wine’s acidity. This is true, for example, with Champagne,
some German rieslings, and some French Vouvrays (chenin blanc). With these wines, a
little sweetness is used to counterbalance the wines’ soaringly high acidity. By way of an
analogy, think about a really bitter espresso. A quarter teaspoon of sugar in the espresso
would not make the espresso sweet. But it would mollify the edges of the bitterness.
  Sweetness, then, can either be a goal, as in dessert wines, or it can be a counterpoint,
something used in small amounts to create overall balance and harmony.
Whether their farming approach is high-tech or traditional (as with Alta Vista’s malbec vineyard in Mendoza, Argentina,
 above), all vintners work within the demands of a vineyard’s microclimate and soils. Here, the canopy of leaves helps
                              shade the grapes from too much heat and potential sunburn.
WHERE IT ALL BEGINS

In the drama of wine, the land itself is a character—rough and brutal sometimes, but also
tender and, ultimately, fragile. The wine that comes from it in any given year will never
exist again. How is it that the land gives us this continual gift? It is an unanswerable
question, for in a literal sense, great wine is not made, but rather revealed and released
from the land. I often think of the story of Michelangelo’s Pietà, depicting the Madonna
holding her crucified son in her arms. When asked how he could sculpt such divine
beauty, Michelangelo is said to have replied that he did not make it; he freed it from the
block of stone.
    Great wines don’t come from just anywhere. The Earth has her own vinous erogenous
zones—a few places of harmonic convergence, where every facet of the vineyard and
every nuance of the grape fit together like chromosomes on a DNA helix. In these rare
places, grapes and ground are transformed into thrilling wine. Indeed, it is grapes’ ability
to reflect the character of the place where they were grown that separates wine from beer
and spirits. Wheat and potatoes do not give “voice” to their environments. But grapes do.

      Vit, the Latin root of the word viticulture, is also the source of vita—life itself.

   The last three decades of the twentieth century were a time when sweeping
advancements in winemaking commanded much of the wine world’s attention. And
rightfully so. With new technologies and scientifically trained winemakers, entire
countries—Portugal, Spain, Argentina—were lifted out of what might be called “peasant
winemaking.” Others, such as New Zealand, sprang, already sophisticated, onto the scene.
But if technology has sometimes seemed more sexy than dirt, it is only because in the
history of wine, dirt has been a comfortable constant, while technologies are fascinatingly
new.

                                               TERROIR
         The French word terroir has no single-word equivalent in English. Historically, terroir
         has been defined as the sum of every environmental force affecting a given vineyard
         site. Soil, slope, orientation to the sun, and elevation are all part of a vineyard’s terroir,
         as is every nuance of climate, including rainfall, wind velocity, frequency of fog,
         cumulative hours of sunshine, average high and low temperatures, and so forth. The
         late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries have been a time of profound discussion
         about the importance of terroir versus winemaking. Is a wine great because of natural
         forces that have come together in near Platonic perfection? Or must all great wines be
         “realized” by the skilled hand of a winemaker? Can human intervention itself—from the
         way the grapes are farmed to the way the wine is aged—be considered part of terroir?
         Indeed, does terroir even exist? “It’s the question of our time—the enological equivalent
         of ‘Is God dead?’” says Randall Grahm, proprietor and winemaker of Bonny Doon
         Vineyard in California.

    As the twenty-first century emerged, however, the picture in the foreground was
already changing. The ancient idea that “wine is made in the vineyard” began once again
to take prominence. In the New World especially, it seemed as if wineries were going back
to the future. For the first time in modern memory, the person who grew the grapes was
given as much credit for the wine as the person who made it.

      “What single cloudless day, what soft late rainfall decides that a vintage shall
      be great among the others? Human care can do almost nothing towards it. It is
      all celestial wizardry, the orbits of planets, sunspots.…”
                                                                       —COLETTE,
                                                                    Prisons et Paradis

   In this chapter, we’ll consider wine from the perspective of viticulture, the science of
grape growing. Although a vineyard may appear passive and pastoral to the casual
observer, to the viticulturist it is a powerful, animate ecosphere full of complexities.
Independently and synergistically, such factors as climate, soil, grape variety and clone,
rootstock, spacing, and many others push and pull wine in different directions. Like the
colors in a kaleidoscope, these elements are swirled together in thousands of intricate,
unique patterns, profoundly influencing the aroma, flavor, body, and finish of a wine. It’s
these nuances of individuality that viticulture celebrates. In the end, fine wines are
compelling not because they are the same, but because they are different.



                                      CLIMATE

Nature influences wine quality conspicuously and dauntlessly through climate. For
starters, climate determines whether grapes can exist at all. Grapevines thrive in temperate
regions where long, warm, frost-free periods allow them to develop. Specifically, vines
begin to grow when the ambient temperature reaches about 50°F (the precise temperature
varies from one grape variety to another). Below 50°F (10°C), the vines remain dormant.
When the average daily temperature reaches 63°F to 68°F (17°C to 20°C), vines will bud
and then flower. Flowering is critical, for only those flowers that become pollinated and
“set” on the cluster become individual grape berries. As crucial as it is, set is an extremely
fragile phenomenon. Even under favorable climatic conditions, up to 85 percent of a
vine’s flowers never set at all and are destined to die as “shatter.” As the temperature
moves into the mid-80s, (28°C to 30°C) vines hit their growth stride and flourish.
Flowering, as it is known, is that fragile time in spring when grape clusters pollinate themselves. Every fertilized flower
                                                    will become a grape.

   If you narrow your field of vision, you find “climates” within climates, created by such
factors as the proximity of oceans and bays; the presence of hills and mountains; the slope,
orientation, and altitude of the vineyard; plus wind, cloudiness, and precipitation.
   In fact, while we use the general term climate to describe most situations, viticulturists
distinguish between macroclimate, mesoclimate, and microclimate. Macroclimate (often
just called climate) is the weather patterns of a general area over a long period of time,
usually the average of thirty years or more. Mesoclimate, the climate of a small area, is
caused by local variations in topography and vegetation, as well as by human actions.
Mesoclimates are found over lakes and in big cities. Vineyards often have unique
mesoclimates. Far smaller in scale is a microclimate, or the climate in which a vine exists.
A microclimate is defined as that area around a vine that extends 6 feet (2 meters) above
the ground and about 3 feet (1 meter) into the soil, below the ground.
    Climates can be counterintuitive. Take, as an example, the Napa Valley—a small wine
region and yet one that has multiple distinct temperature zones. Calistoga—the warmest
part of the Napa Valley—is, surprisingly, the farthest north. Carneros—as much as 30°F
(17°C) cooler than Calistoga—is nonetheless the farthest south. Another even more
dramatic reversal of the expected: Several of the wine regions in Santa Barbara County,
nearly 300 miles (483 kilometers) to the south of Napa, are some of the coolest in
California. In both of these cases, proximity to the ocean matters more than latitude when
it comes to climate. Santa Barbara’s wine regions, for example, are east-west-running
valleys that form virtual wind tunnels for bracing breezes and fog drawn in off the Pacific
Ocean.
                                        A YEAR AS A GRAPE
 During the course of a single year, grapes and vines go through several important stages. The life cycle begins in
 the spring, around April 1 in the northern hemisphere (the dates are six months later in the southern hemisphere),
 when new shoots—small, green, feathery branches—emerge from dormant buds on the vine. This is called bud
 break. As May arrives, the shoots lengthen and tiny flowers appear which “set,” that is, pollinate themselves
 (helpfully, cultivated grapevines are hermaphroditic). The pollinated flowers grow into tiny berries that stay green
 and hard until midsummer. In July, the berries begin to soften, swell, and change color (called veraison). The skins
 of white varieties will turn shades of yellow, gray, and light pink; red varieties will turn purple and some will appear
 almost blue-black. Come fall—usually September through October—the grapes will be harvested. Finally, in
 November and December, the vine loses its leaves and goes into dormancy until the following spring when the
 cycle will begin anew.

   Ironically, bodies of water can have a cooling effect or a warming effect, or both, at
different times. Water tempers and stabilizes the climate. A marine breeze can cool down a
hot vineyard, but it can also warm a vineyard where temperatures are dropping and frost
threatens.
    One of the most intriguing aspects of any wine region’s climate is the impact hillsides
and mountains can have and how that subsequently affects the ripeness of the grapes. A
mountain’s creased face contains crevices, caverns, and canyons that become nichelike
mesoclimates on their own. Mountains can block cold winds, acting as shields behind
which grapes can mature. They can also impede ripeness, acting as huge slides that cause
frost and cold air to pool in vineyards on the valley floor. If high enough, mountains also
force clouds to give up their moisture as frequent rain on one side, while the other side
basks in the sun. A perfect example of this is found in Washington State, where the
Cascade mountain range causes the western part of the state near Seattle to be extremely
overcast and rainy, while in the eastern part, grapes—with the help of irrigation—thrive in
sunny, near desert conditions. Mountains also offer the possibility of different vineyard
altitudes. A vineyard at 2,500 feet (762 meters) will generally (but not always) be cooler
overall than one at 500 feet (152 meters) on the same mountain. Not surprisingly, the
wines will usually be strikingly different.
   The old zinfandel vines of the Napa Valley have never grown on trellises. Their stark, twisted trunks are especially
                   striking in spring when all around them grow stems of vivid yellow wild mustard.




For every winery in the world, the most important decision of the year is when to pick. Once the decision is made, crews
                        work relentlessly and quickly to harvest the grapes at optimal ripeness.

   In general, in very cool regions like northern Germany, the most prized vineyards are
always on mountainsides, since slopes angled precisely southward act like huge solar
panels catching every ray of the sun. (In the southern hemisphere, cold-climate vineyards
face north.) Sometimes even the name of a vineyard reveals this importance. On the cool
alpine foothills of Piedmont, Italy, famous vineyards often contain the words bricco or
sorì, as in the Bricco Asili vineyard of the producer Ceretto or the Sorì Tildìn vineyard of
Angelo Gaja. A bricco is the sun-catching crest of a hill; sorì in Piedmontese dialect
means a south-facing slope where the sun melts the snow first.
   Alas, sun can be a double-edged sword. In some wine regions, too little sun is not the
problem—too much is. Intense sun can cause grapes to lose considerable acidity through
respiration, leading to flat, flabby wine, or cause hyperactive leaf growth, which shades
the grapes and may lead to vegetal and other off flavors in the wine. As heat becomes
excessive, unprotected grapes begin to scorch and their leaves wither and burn. At about
104°F (40°C), sustained heat becomes intolerable for most grapevines, and the grapes start
to shrivel into raisins. Thus, wine producers in hot, sunny climates often face hurdles that
are the complete opposite of those faced by wine producers in cooler climates.
    But no matter where they are located, viticulturists are trying to find balance in the
vineyard, in much the same way that a wine-maker aims for balance in a wine. When this
is achieved, the vines reach a healthy medium between what viticulturists call vigor
(growth of leaves and shoots), and fruitfulness (number of grape clusters and size of
grapes).
   Finally, the biggest current concern regarding the impact of climate on viticulture is the
issue of climate change. It is fair to say that winemakers nearly the world over name
climate change as a major—if not the major—worry facing wine regions today. The
effects of climate change on viticulture can already be felt in many parts of the world,
including Spain, where new plantings are focused on high-heat-tolerant varieties, and
Germany, where a decade of warm temperatures has led winemakers to experiment with
warm-loving red varieties as well as cold-tolerant varieties such as riesling. What climate
change ultimately means for wine regions around the world is not fully known, but some
of those regions are taking an active approach to the issue. The Napa Valley vintners, for
example, employ climate scientists from the Scripps Institute to conduct research and
collect data on the effect of climate change on viticulture within the valley.

               THE BANE OF RAIN AND THE HELL OF HAIL
         Rain, especially just before or during harvest, is dreaded throughout the wine world.
         Why? Absorbed quickly through the roots, rainwater can bloat the grapes, diluting their
         flavors. Severe rain can actually tear open grapes or even break off the bunches,
         destroying the crop. If the rain is followed by warm temperatures, high humidity, and no
         wind, rot or mildew can easily take hold. Finally, trying to pick grapes when the vineyard
         is a foot deep in mud is no picnic. Hail is even worse. Defined as large, irregular clumps
         of icy frozen water (sometimes as large as golf balls), hail can occur as part of a
         thunderstorm and wreak devastating damage. A hail storm in 2013 that swept through
         Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne (in each region it lasted no longer than ten
         minutes) turned hundreds of acres of vineyard into wasteland. The damage in
         Bordeaux alone was estimated at over 100 million euros.
            Hail is even worse. Defined as large, irregular clumps of icy frozen water (sometimes
         as large as golf balls), hail can occur as part of a thunderstorm and wreak devastating
         damage. A hail storm in 2013 that swept through Bordeaux, Burgundy, and Champagne
         (in each region it lasted no longer than ten minutes) turned hundreds of acres of
         vineyard into wasteland. The damage in Bordeaux alone was estimated at over 100
         million euros.
                                       STRESS

One of the few monodimensional rules is one of wine’s wonderful curiosities. In making
fine wine, what is ideal is not a perfect environment but, rather, something less than
consummate. A perfectly sunny, hot climate augmented by moisture and fertile soils with
ample nutrients may be good for many plants (as jungles testify), but is usually too much
for grapevines. All of the world’s great vineyards are in places that are in some way
marginal. Assuming that the stress (from lack of sun, water, and/or nutrients) is not so
severe that the vines shut down, go into shock, or die, an endurable amount of adversity
forces grapevines to struggle, adapt, and put their energy into their reproductive system to
ensure survival. The essential element of a vine’s reproductive system is, of course, its
grapes. When healthy vines are forced to concentrate their sugars in a limited number of
grape clusters, the result is grapes and wine of greater character and concentration.
                        TEMPERATURE SWINGS

Many winegrowers believe that good stress can come in the form of wide temperature
fluctuations, either from spring to fall or from day to night or both. Temperature swings
can help create balance.
   The difference between average daytime and average nighttime temperatures is called
diurnal temperature fluctuation. For example, wine regions that are extremely hot during
the day, like Ribera del Duero, on the north-central plains of Spain, benefit from nights
that can be as much as 40°F (22°C) cooler, effectively shutting down the ripening process
and helping grapes to preserve essential acidity. By delaying ripening, cool nights also
extend the span of time from bud break to harvest, leading to better total physiological
maturity.
   As for seasonal change, grapevines don’t like ambiguity. Vines need definitive
temperature cues so that bud break and grape development and maturation proceed
steadily and uniformly, ensuring (all other things being equal) a good harvest. Very warm
winters can awaken vines. With nutrients being pumped into their shoots, vines soon
become confused and begin to bud in the wrong season. Uneven or untimely budding can
wreak havoc on a vineyard, creating a patchwork quilt of mixed-up vines, all maturing at
different rates and times. A definitively cold winter, followed by its opposite, a
definitively warm spring and summer, is the optimal viticultural scenario.
                                        ROCK GROUP
Grapevines are impacted not only by the soils they grow in, but also by the type of rock that may be
present. The basic rock forms are:
SEDIMENTARY ROCK: It includes arenaceous (e.g., sandstone), argillaceous (e.g., clay), calcareous
(e.g., limestone), carbonaceous (e.g., peat, lignite, or coal), and siliceous (e.g., quartz).
IGNEOUS ROCK: Formed from molten or partially molten material, most igneous rocks are crystalline.
METAMORPHIC: Sedimentary or igneous rock that has been transformed by heat or pressure.
Examples of metamorphic rock include marble and slate.
                             WATER AND FROST

Like sunlight, the water that vines receive must be part of an overall balanced
environment. There is no optimal amount. How much water vines need (and when they
need it) depends on a number of factors, including the age and size of the vines, the length
of the growing season, the temperatures during the growing season, wind, humidity, the
drainage and water-holding capacity of the soil, and the spacing of the vines, to name a
few.
   Vines are not arbitrary in the way they grow; they search for water. Well-drained soils
encourage the roots to burrow deeper into the earth, where they find a more stable
environment of moisture and nutrients. Vines with fully developed root systems can
handle drought or other climatic difficulties better.
    In the world’s generally dry wine regions—including parts of California, Washington
State, Australia, Chile, Spain, and Portugal—lack of rainfall can be exacerbated by long,
droughtlike summers. In the New World, these wine growing regions generally allow
irrigation, although increasing limitations on water resources are destined to make
viticulture more difficult in these places.
   In most of Europe, irrigation is forbidden (under severe vintage circumstances,
restrictions are sometimes temporarily lifted). In Europe, natural rainfall and moisture is
often sufficient to grow healthy vines. Prohibiting irrigation is seen as a way of ensuring
quality, since vines given excess water can produce swollen grapes with diluted flavors.
This “dilution effect” is also, of course, one of the reasons winemakers fear too much rain.
   Not surprisingly, timing is everything. In the spring, right before flowering, vines need
some water to jump-start growth. Without water at this critical moment, the flowers will
not set properly—and therefore will not create grape berries. Water is also critical during
veraison, that time in summer when the grapes begin to change color. A lack of water then
can lead to excessively small grapes that never achieve maturity.
   One form of water—frost—is unconditionally a threat to grapes and grapevines. Spring
frosts may kill buds and shoots and thus destroy the potential for a crop. Early fall frosts
can destroy entire swaths of vineyards, or ravage foliage enough that ripening is impeded,
resulting in weakly flavored wines. Even in winter, when the vine is dormant, an excessive
cold snap can be ruinous. Below 25°F (-4°C), the vine’s trunk may split, leaving it open to
infection. After prolonged below-freezing temperatures, the entire vine and root system
can die.
In the mountainous Priorat region of northeastern Spain, old, low-yielding carignan vines are almost entirely covered by
     snow in winter. With their deep roots and sturdy trunks, old vines are generally able to withstand extremely cold
                                                       temperatures.

   The methods used to counter frost are often desperate and generally expensive, but
vintners have no choice; the financial repercussions of losing an entire year’s crop are too
severe. Giant windmill-like frost protectors are fixtures in many cold areas. These help stir
up the warm air hovering above the vineyard and mix it with the colder air that has settled
like a thick blanket under the vines. A more expensive takeoff on the windmill idea is to
hire helicopters to fly low over the vineyards, zigzagging back and forth until the threat of
frost has passed. And finally, there’s a solution that seems crazy, but works: spraying the
vines with water, using overhead sprinklers. The water coats the leaves, shoots, and buds,
forming a thin glove of ice that insulates the vines from windchill and traps the plant’s
natural heat. That incremental amount of insulation, coupled with the tiny amount of heat
thrown off when water turns to ice, is enough to keep the leaves, shoots, and buds from
freezing unless it gets significantly colder.
                                         WIND

On the Aegean Islands of Greece—one of the most windswept wine regions of the world
—not even the mostly-impervious-to-everything olive tree can grow. Vines survive only
because they are trained in a circular manner so close to the ground that they look like
large doughnuts, with the grapes crouching even lower in the center hole. Each vine is
called a stefáni (crown); it will grow that way for twenty years, after which time the trunk
becomes strong enough to withstand the whipping wind, and the vine can be trained
somewhat more upright.
   Most wine regions are not subject to such gales, but wind still torments grapevines in
many parts of the world. Although a gentle breeze is almost always good (it cools the
grapes and promotes air circulation as a guard against rot), a slashing wind is another
story. Right after flowering, a severe wind can prevent flowers from setting properly,
scattering them in the air so that they never fertilize and become grapes. Bludgeoning
wind can break off tender parts of the vines, damage the canes, bruise the leaves, and even
rip away the fruit. Lastly, a harsh wind may cause the vine to close its stomata,
microscopic holes in the undersides of the leaves that are responsible for evaporation.
With the stomata closed, the vine ceases to draw water through its root tips. Eventually, all
growth comes to a halt.
                                       The Soils to Know
Exactly how a wine’s flavors are influenced by the type of soil the grapes are grown in remains one of wine’s
central mysteries. Yet, for the past millennium, winemakers everywhere have considered soil a critical factor in the
character of any given wine. Soil not only retains heat (or not), reflects sunlight (or not), and holds nutrients for the
vines, soil also importantly influences water drainage. A good soil must retain enough water to steadily supply the
vine, but not so much water that the roots become saturated. Below you’ll find basic descriptions of some of the
main types of soil that vines are known to live in (and often thrive in).
ALLUVIAL SOIL Fertile soil that has been transported down a slope, usually by a river or stream. At the
bottom of the slope, alluvial soil usually forms a fan that contains gravel, sand, and silt. Alluvial soils are
found, for example, in the Napa Valley, especially near the area of western Oakville at the foot of the
Mayacamas Mountains.
BASALT Cooled lava from volcanic rock that is high in calcium, iron, and magnesium. Very evident in the
Willamette Valley of Oregon, to name one place.
CALCAREOUS SOIL Alkaline soil with high levels of calcium and magnesium carbonate. Often
calcareous soils are “cool,” which means they retain water and delay ripening, thereby leading to more
acidic wines.
CHALK Very porous, soft limestone soil that vine roots can easily penetrate. A classic soil in
Champagne, France, among other places.
CLAY Sedimentary rock–based soil that has good water retention ability but poor drainage. The soil is
often very “cool” and high in acidity. The Right Bank of Bordeaux is dominated by clay-based soils.
FLINT Siliceous stone (sedimentary rocks that contain silica from silica-secreting organisms such as
diatoms and some types of sea sponges) that reflects sun and heat well. The Pouilly-Fumé wines of the
Loire Valley are generally produced from flint-based soils.
GALESTRO Schist-based soil found in the Tuscany region of Italy.
GNEISS A coarse-grained form of granite.
GRANITE A hard, mineral-rich soil that is composed of 40 percent to 60 percent quartz. The soil warms
quickly and retains heat well. Thus, granite soils are ideal with acidic grapes like gamay. Granite is found
in Beaujolais, as well as in the Cornas region of the northern Rhône Valley.
GRAVEL Soil that is loose and pebbly and has good drainage and poor fertility. Vines planted in this type
of soil must penetrate deeply to find nutrients in the subsoil. The Graves and Sauternes regions of
Bordeaux consist predominantly of gravel-based soil.
GREYWACKE Sedimentary soil formed by rivers depositing quartz, mudstone, and feldspar. It is found in
vineyards of Germany, New Zealand, and South Africa.
HARDPAN A dense layer of clay or other material that is impermeable to water. In some areas of
Bordeaux, a sandy, iron-rich layer is located deep enough below the surface to act as the bottom of a
water table for the vines.
LIMESTONE A wide range of sedimentary-based soils consisting of calcium carbonates, many of which
are formed from the skeletal fragments of marine organisms. Limestone is consistently alkaline and is
generally planted with grapes of high acidity levels. This is a main soil type in Burgundy, Champagne,
and several parts of the Loire Valley. Because limestone is a remnant of some ancient seabeds, certain
islands (including the Florida Keys) are made from limestone.
LLICORELLA A soil type found in the Priorat appellation of Spain. The soil is a mix of slate and quartz
that is very porous and drains well.
LOAM Warm, soft, fertile soil composed of roughly equal amounts of silt, sand, and clay. It is typically too
fertile for high-quality wines.
LOESS very fine, silt-based soil composed of wind-borne sediment that is typically angular and
decalcified. The soil has good water retention and warming properties. Loess is a common soil type in
top Austrian and Washington State vineyards.
MARL Calcareous clay–based soil that is “cool” and thus delays ripening, resulting in wines with
prominent acidity. Marl is typically deep and lacking in stone fragments; it is the main soil type in the
Piedmont wine region of Italy.
QUARTZ A common material found in sand-and silt-based soils. The high soil pH of quartz can reduce
the acidity of the resulting wines. But quartz also stores heat, so it can increase ripening of the grapes.
Quartz is very notable in the vineyards of the lower Nahe in Germany, where the wines have stone-fruit
and wet stone flavors.
SAND Warm, airy soil that is composed of tiny particles of weathered rocks. One of the few soils that the
insect phylloxera does not thrive in (see page 30). The soil drains well but does not have good water
retention. Sand is a main component in the soils of California’s south central coast near Santa Barbara.
Sandstone is a sedimentary soil composed of sand particles that has been pressure-bound by various
iron-based minerals.
SCHIST Laminated, crystalline rock–based soil that retains heat well and is rich in magnesium and
potassium, but is poor in organic nutrients and nitrogen. The upper slopes of Alsace’s Andlau region are
planted on schist-based soils.
SHALE Fine-grain sedimentary-based soil that can turn into slate when under geologic pressure. The
soil is moderately fertile and retains heat well. New York State’s Finger Lakes region boasts shale-rich
soil, brought by glacial deposits hundreds of thousands of years ago.
SILEX A flint- and sand-based soil type, found primarily in the Loire Valley, that is formed from a mixture
of clay, limestone, and silica.
SILT Soil type consisting of fine-grain deposits that offer good water retention but poor drainage. It is
more fertile than sand.
SLATE The most common soil type of the Mosel region of Germany. Slate is a metamorphic, platelike
rock formed when shale, clay, or silt-stone is subjected to pressure deep within the earth. The soil retains
heat well and warms up relatively quickly.
TERRA ROSSA A sedimentary soil, known as “red earth,” that is formed after carbonates have been
leached out of limestone. The breakdown leaves behind iron deposits that oxidize and turn the soil a
rustic red color. This soil type is found in some areas along the Mediterranean and in Coonawarra,
Australia.
TUFA A highly friable calcareous soil created from exploding volcanic rock flung into the air. Common in
the Loire Valley of France.
VOLCANIC Soil that is derived from one of two volcanic activities. 1) Vent-based volcanic soil is formed
from rock material or molten globules that have been ejected at high velocity into the air and then have
cooled before settling to the earth (such as tufa). 2) Lava-based volcanic soil is the product of molten
lava flows from a volcano. Ninety percent of lava-based soil is basalt.
For a more extensive list of soils in which grapevines grow, I recommend Tom Stevenson’s excellent New
Sotheby’s Wine Encyclopedia.
         WHERE WERE THE WORLD’S FIRST WINE GRAPES
                         GROWN?
Turkey may not have as much cachet as Bordeaux, but Anatolia, in southern Turkey, is in effect the
world’s first wine appellation, according to research conducted by Swiss grape geneticist Dr. José
Vouillamoz, of the University of Neuchâtel in Switzerland, and Dr. Patrick McGovern, scientific director of
the Biomolecular Archaeology Laboratory at the University of Pennsylvania Museum in Philadelphia. The
teams’ research, published in 2012, indicates that people in Anatolia—part of the historic Fertile Crescent
—grew and harvested grapevines to make wine as long ago as 8000 B.C., and possibly before.
   Vouillamoz and McGovern unearthed the origin of domesticated wine grapes by comparing the DNA
sequences of cultivated grapevines with the DNA sequences of wild grapevines all over the world. The
greatest similarities between the two were found in wild grapevines growing in Anatolia, although areas
of Iran, Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan also tell tales of early domestication and wine drinking. Clay
jars used to store and age wine have been found in all of these areas, some dating to 5400 B.C.
    Wild grapevines were abundant in Anatolia around the same time that Stone Age farmers settled into
villages and domesticated wild grains. Vouillamoz and McGovern hypothesize that the Anatolians
collected the berries from the vines they found growing freely along the ground and high up into trees.
When it was discovered that the fermented juice of these wild grapes was delicious (not to mention
euphorically mind-altering), the farmers appear to have begun planting wild grapevines alongside their
grains. Ten thousand years later, the wines you sip are made from distant descendants of these early
vines.
   One of the fascinating facts revealed by the research is that many popular grape varieties, all from the
grape species Vitis vinifera, are more closely related than previously thought. For example, dense,
peppery syrah is the unexpected great-grandchild of subtle, delicate pinot noir. Pinot (responsible for
pinot noir, pinot blanc, and pinot gris grapes) is closely related to the French grape savagnin, but so far
no one can tell which grape descended from the other. And although it makes only a neutral-tasting
quaffing wine, gouais blanc, the surprising Casanova of wine grapes, is the parent of more than eighty
other grape varieties, including chardonnay, riesling, and gamay.
                                                      SOIL

The ground has always been seductive—the smell of it, the feel of it, the sight of it, and
certainly the possession of it. The history of civilization is in large part a running
commentary on man’s relationship to the land. Soil’s allure is very evident in the world of
wine. There is something strangely beautiful about the white chalk of Champagne, the
legacy of ancient seabeds and sea fossils; or the jet-black, pitted stones of Santorini in
Greece, the relics of a massive volcanic explosion; or the cool, blue-gray slate shards of
the Mosel in Germany, remnants of the path of glaciers. Remarkably, vines grow
contentedly in all of these.




   Soil is undeniably seductive. For thousands of years, it has also been the intellectual assumption behind a wine’s
        character—that is, the notion that a given wine tastes the way it does because of the soil it was born in.

   Soil is defined as the naturally occurring loose particles that cover the Earth’s surface.
Soil is composed of tiny bits of broken rock, the pore spaces of air between them, water,
minerals, and organic matter. There are five main factors in the creation of soil: parent
material, climate, topography, biota, and time.
   Scientists classify soil into six categories. The broadest category are soil orders, and
there are twelve in the world (interestingly, in the small Napa Valley, six of the world’s
twelve soil orders can be found). From orders, soils are more and more finely categorized.
Ultimately, the most specific classification is called a soil series. In the U.S., for one
example, there are some seventeen thousand soil series, each marked by a unique set of
characteristics based on the arrangement of the soil’s layers, its color, texture, structure,
consistency, and chemical and mineralogical properties.
   As far as grapevines are concerned, one of the important factors of any soil is the size
of the soil’s particles. Larger particles such as sand (relatively loose, large grains of
weathered rock) can be important for good drainage. But smaller particles such as silt and
clay are also important, for these may help hold just enough water to support the vine’s
growth. Other particles, such as rocks and organic matter, also help create the delicate
balance of water drainage versus water retention. In addition, rocks and organic matter
aerate the soil and contribute minerals and nutrients.
    Most viticulturalists today believe that the most important soil characteristic is its
capacity to drain water. Nothing could seem less exciting, yet good drainage is critical in
viticulture, ensuring that vines push their roots deep into the ground (sometimes 20 feet/6
meters or more) to find a stable source of water and nutrients.
   The geologic formation of the land is another important element in drainage. Limestone
and schist have large vertical planes sliced by fissures—perfect for vine roots tunneling in
search of water. Conversely, dense subsoil or some sort of impenetrable horizontal
formation may cause the roots to remain closer to the surface, where they can soak up
water in heavy rains, or more easily suffer from drought.




  In the remarkable vineyards of Châteauneuf-du-Pape, the “soil” is composed of large round rocks deposited over
                      millennia by the receding Rhône River. Barely a speck of dirt can be seen.

   One of the most important—if curious—aspects of soil is its color and ability to reflect
sunlight or absorb heat. In the cool, northern region of Champagne, vines are trained low
so that the ripening grapes can take advantage of the warm sun bouncing off the white,
chalky ground. (At one time the thrifty Champenois used to accentuate this phenomenon
by scattering bits of white plastic garbage bags in the vineyards which, despite the PR
drawbacks, did reflect the sun.) In equally cool Germany, dark gray and blue slate rocks
help hold the sun’s heat, even after the sunlight is beginning to retreat.
   The big question, of course, concerns flavor. Taste two pinot noirs from the same small
Burgundian domaine, for example, and it would seem almost self-evident that soil
profoundly affects flavor. The two wines were made from the same variety, by the same
person, using the same process and the same minimal equipment. The wines have been
aged and stored identically, and yet they taste remarkably different. How else can one
account for so intriguing a phenomenon except through the mysteries of soil?
   Yet, while soil is undoubtedly the soul of wine, there is no absolute correlation between
certain soil types and specific wine flavors. (At least not that we yet know of.) A vineyard
with, say, granite soils, does not have a predictive flavor effect because of those soils.
Moreover, while it’s tempting to think of the soil as a kind of underground spice shop in
which a vine can literally root around for flavors, that’s not how a vine works. The roots of
grapevines can suck up only molecules, ions, and some available forms of minerals. These
compounds are then metabolized for vine and grape growth. How soils “work” is, in the
end, one of wine’s greatest unanswered questions. I can’t resist the pun of saying: We’ve
only just begun to scratch the surface.
                 MATCHING GRAPES TO GROUND

However omnipotent climate and soil may seem, they cannot be considered apart from the
variety of grape being grown. A climate too warm for successful pinot noir is one that can
be perfect for syrah. Varieties respond differently to heat, hours of sun, water, wind, and
every other facet of climate and soil. Great wine can result only when the grape variety is
tuned in, like the signal on a radio dial, to the “channel” of its terroir. To continue the
metaphor, when a grape variety is less perfectly suited to its environment, you can still
hear the music, but it doesn’t have the same sound quality. This is why a vineyard that
produces extraordinary riesling should not be pulled up and replanted with merlot simply
because merlot has become popular. Clearly, it can be pulled up and replanted, and some
vintners do chase trends. However, mediocre merlot is not better than excellent riesling,
even though it might very well make the vintner more money.
    In general, certain grape varieties (cabernet sauvignon, zinfandel, sauvignon blanc)
prefer relatively warm temperatures; others (pinot noir, riesling), cool ones. And some
grapes can dance to almost any beat. Chardonnay is mind-boggling in its flexibility. It is as
happy in the warm regions of Australia as it is in nippy Chablis, France. Miraculously, it
can produce good wine in either climate, although admittedly, the style of the chardonnay
will be different. Great chardonnay, however, still appears to be the province of selected
sites within cooler environments.
   There is an old rule of thumb in Bordeaux that vines need one hundred critical days for
proper ripening. In fact, different grape varieties may take as few as ninety days or nearly
twice that to ripen. The time required dictates where certain varieties can successfully be
planted. Clearly, it would make no sense to plant a variety that needs 150 days to ripen in
a place with a growing season 120 days long.
   If grape varieties are sensitive to their sites, does that mean that every site is ideal for
only one grape variety? It depends on the site and its size. Many of the world’s top
winegrowing sites—for example, the Burgundy vineyard called Romanée-Conti (pinot
noir) or the Mosel vineyard Bernkasteler Doctor (riesling)—are each planted with a single
variety that appears to supremely express the uniqueness of that small swath of ground.
The wines from these sites become something more than just great tasting. They become
legendary—masterpieces of Nature.
                            IT’S A DOG’S LIFE NO, REALLY




 In most places, a dog is a dog. But in a California vineyard, you might as well spell dog backward. In a
 vineyard, a dog realizes her higher calling. A good vineyard dog is, first and foremost, in charge of overall
 public relations. She (or he) greets—and loudly announces—all visitors. She then attends all wine
 tastings, pre-sampling the baguettes for freshness and occasionally resting her head in the lap of the
 taster so as to inspire creative descriptions of the wines being tasted. A vineyard dog is, of course,
 faithfully dusty from stalking mice, moles, wild turkeys, rabbits, and deer in the vineyard. She knows
 exactly when the vineyard crew stops for lunch, so as to help in the consumption of burritos con pollo
 and tacos al pastor. Above all, a good vineyard dog knows (this is true) when the grapes are ripe and will
 nibble a cluster right off the vine when the time is right.


   On the other hand, many sites the world over provide excellent environments for two or
more grape varieties that are fairly similar in their needs. For example, in both Bordeaux
and northern California, cabernet sauvignon and merlot are often planted in adjoining
vineyard blocks. If a site can support two or more similar varieties well, then planting
those there can have advantages both in the vineyard and in the cellar. In the vineyard,
multiple varieties can be an asset because grapes ripen at different rates. If the earlier-
ripening grape is already picked when a devastating storm hits, the grower loses only a
percentage of the crop. Many Old World vineyards, including the vineyards of Bordeaux,
are planted with several varieties precisely as an economic hedge against bad weather.
And in the cellar, the winemaker has more colors on the palette with which to paint.
                PHYLLOXERA: THE BUG OF THE CENTURY
In the latter part of the nineteenth century, phylloxera—a tiny, yellow, aphid-like bug one-thirtieth of an
inch long and one-sixtieth of an inch wide—spread throughout Europe, destroying vineyards in its path.
From Europe, phylloxera (phi-LOX-er-ah) moved around the world, killing vineyards in South Africa,
Australia, New Zealand, and California. So swift and sure was the annihilation that many vintners
believed the world’s vineyards were doomed, and that wine would cease to exist. Originally named
Phylloxera vastatrix (the “dry leaf devastator”) and now specifically identified as the insect Daktulosphaira
vitifoliae, phylloxera feeds on a vine’s roots, ultimately sucking life out of the vine. Although native to
America, the bug remained harmless and unknown for centuries. The reason? Indigenous American
vines belong to several species that are tolerant of the insect. Native European vines, however, belong to
the species vinifera (vin-IF-er-ah), which is susceptible to the pest.
   In the 1860s, when native American vines were sent to southern France for experimentation,
phylloxera, unbeknownst to anyone, hitched a ride on the roots. Within two decades, the “phylloxera
plague” had destroyed vineyards throughout Europe. If phylloxera was deadly, it was also eerie. Too
minuscule to be seen, the insect wrought havoc totally undetected. European growers watched in
maddening frustration as their vines yellowed, shriveled, and then slowly perished. If the grapes
managed to ripen at all, the wine made from them was often weak and watery. Eventually the vine would
simply collapse.
    Countless remedies were tried. French vineyards were doused with chemicals, flooded with water, and
irrigated with white wine. By 1873, the French government even offered a prize—30,000 francs (about
$10,000 today)—to anyone who could come up with a solution. Nothing worked.
   While phylloxera was waging war in Europe, the young California wine industry was unknowingly
setting itself up to become phylloxera’s next victim. California’s first vintners busily began planting
vineyards with European vines, which were considered superior to native American ones. Once
phylloxera struck, some 17,000 acres (6,880 hectares) of California vineyard were ruined before the only
known remedy was discovered. By grafting European vines onto the roots of American varieties, the
aphidlike creature can be rendered powerless.
   As the twentieth century approached, vineyards around the world were painstakingly uprooted, vine by
vine, and replanted on American rootstocks. Today, most wines worldwide come from vines growing from
American roots.
   Growers and winemakers undoubtedly thought they’d seen the last of phylloxera. But when a second
wave of the pest spontaneously erupted in the Napa Valley in 1983, the wine industry knew it was up
against an extremely formidable foe. Known as biotype B, the new phylloxera began moving at lightning
speed through vineyards planted with a specific type of rootstock called AxR1. Throughout the California
wine boom of the 1960s and 1970s, AxR1 had been the rootstock of choice. By 1980, nearly two-thirds
of Napa and Sonoma vineyards were planted with it.
   The fatal flaw was genetic: AxR1, a hybrid, had one American species parent and one vinifera parent.
California plant biologists knew this, but in early experimental trials, AxR1 had performed well against
phylloxera—so well that California scientists felt safe in recommending it. (Interestingly, European
scientists remained skeptical about AxR1 and suggested that European growers use other American
rootstocks instead.) By 1995, biotype B had spread throughout much of California and into Washington
State and Oregon. As of 1997 (the final year statistics were collected), replanting costs in California
alone were estimated at about $10,000 (in 1997 dollars) an acre as tens of thousands of acres of Napa
and Sonoma vineyards were pulled up and replanted with different rootstocks.
   It takes at least three years before new vines can be commercially harvested. For every California
winery with vineyards planted on AxR1, the staggering financial burden of replanting was exacerbated by
the loss of income from vineyards that were not fully productive for several years.
   There is a small silver lining to the story, however. The replanting that has taken place has been done
with the benefit of several decades’ worth of knowledge. As a result, vineyards have been replanted with
varieties, clones, and rootstocks better suited to each site. Have even better California wines resulted?
Most winemakers and viticulturists say yes.
                                       CLONES

When most of us think about wines, we think about various grape varieties. Chardonnay
tastes different from sauvignon blanc, pinot noir tastes different from merlot, and so forth.
Moreover, we think about a grape variety as a single thing. But grape varieties are not
quite that simple.
   Grapevines, it turns out, are not genetically stable; they spontaneously mutate over
time. Each grape variety, therefore, is actually a collection of numerous subtypes called
clones. A clone is a genetic variation that has been singled out and reproduced. All clones
are identical to their mother vine, because cultivated grapevines are reproduced by
cuttings (not from seed.)
   To explain clones in a very simplistic but helpful way, let’s say it’s the beginning of
time. Adam has a vineyard and Eve has a vineyard (seems right given that this is The Wine
Bible). Adam and Eve each grow pinot noir. Their son Abel grows up and decides he, too,
wants to plant a vineyard. Abel tastes his mother’s pinot noir and his father’s pinot noir
and decides his mother’s is better. He scrutinizes both vineyards. In his mother’s vineyard,
every now and then, he sees a vine that somehow looks better, more healthy, the grapes
smaller and more uniformly shaped. To plant his vineyard, Abel takes a cutting from one
of these special vines in his mother’s vineyard. He grows all of his vines from this cutting.
Today, we’d say that Abel planted “Eve’s Clone” of pinot noir.
   Different clones of a variety make wines that smell and taste different, which is why
winemakers are so focused on them. One clone of pinot noir may have a strong strawberry
jam character; another clone may be suggestive of mushrooms. Some clones have more
intensity of flavor in general, while others can be fairly neutral tasting. All of this is
important for wine producers, for a wine’s ultimate flavor and character will be affected
by the clone or clones the producer chooses to plant.
  Virtually everywhere in the world, the scion (the upper part of the vine) is grafted onto a disease-resistant rootstock.
                    Grafting is a time-consuming, delicate process that requires considerable skill.

   There’s a catch, however, and it’s an important (and frustrating) one. No clone is ever
superior in all sites. In other words, the fact that clone X produces great wine from a given
piece of ground does not mean clone X will necessarily produce the best wine in a
vineyard a half mile away. Clone and site are inextricably and inevitably bound together in
a complex dance. And the results are not always predictable.
   How many clones of any given variety are there? It depends on two factors: How old
the variety is and how genetically erratic it is. Pinot noir, for example, is an ancient vine
probably two or more millennia old. It has had a lot of time to mutate compared to, say,
cabernet sauvignon, which is only several hundred years old. Moreover, pinot noir is
highly unstable genetically, which is not so true for cabernet sauvignon. Thus, there are
hundreds of clones of pinot noir, but only a dozen or so well-known clones of cabernet
sauvignon.
   All of this said, clonal research is relatively new. The discovery of clones dates back
just to the 1920s, and practically speaking, it has been only in the past couple of decades
that producers have been able to request the specific clone or clones they want when they
purchase cuttings from a nursery. Most vineyards worldwide remain as they always have
been, a mixture of clones. Often, this is a good thing. After all, by blending several clones
of a given variety, a winemaker may have a better chance of producing a wine with nuance
and complexity.
                                  ROOTSTOCKS

One of the simple but rather amazing facts about grapevines is that most of those growing
in the world today are not growing from their own roots. Instead, most grapevines are
grafted onto one of a handful of different rootstocks that are tolerant of specific pests or
soil conditions. This might not seem particularly compelling news, but if it were not for
rootstocks, the main species of grapes used for wine would have become extinct in most
parts of the world about a century ago.
   The rootstock is simply the root system beneath the soil. And that rootstock has nothing
to do with the variety of grapes produced. The grapes come from the variety grafted onto
the rootstock (called the scion). Varieties as different as chardonnay, sangiovese, and
riesling can all be grafted onto the same type of rootstock. It’s also possible to change the
variety growing on a rootstock. If a grower who has planted sauvignon blanc on a
rootstock later decides he would do better with chardonnay, he can usually scalp off the
sauvignon blanc and graft chardonnay onto that same rootstock instead.
   It might seem as though the roots are merely a channel through which water and
nutrients flow. In actuality, rootstocks play a far more complex and important role. They
have the power to affect a vine’s vigor, fruitfulness, and resistance to drought and disease.
    Let’s backtrack a moment. Until the mid-1800s, most vines grew on their own original
roots. However, when phylloxera, a root-eating aphidlike insect, began to ravage
vineyards around the world, rootstocks took on new importance. The minuscule yellow
bug is native to North America. Native American vines, which belong to several dozen
different species, are tolerant of the pest. Unfortunately, European vines, all of which
belong to the single species vinifera, are not. In the mid-1800s, when American vines were
first brought to France for experimental purposes, phylloxera rode along, clinging to the
roots.
   Between 1860 and 1890, the American pest laid siege to Europe’s vineyards. Ironically,
the roots of American grapevines proved to be their saviors. French botanist Jules-Émile
Planchon and American entomologist Charles Valentine Riley were two of the key figures
whose detective work over two decades and subsequent lobbying led to the planting of
American rootstocks in France, so that the last living French vines could be grafted onto
them and thereby saved. Later, Texas vine expert T. V. Munson helped by introducing
American rootstocks that were especially well suited to French soils. Eventually, most
vineyards worldwide were pulled out and the vines replanted on American rootstocks.
   Today, most rootstocks can be traced back to three major native American grape
species: Vitis riparia, Vitis rupestris (also known as St. George), and Vitis berlandieri.
Many of the root-stocks used throughout the world are crosses, or hybrids, of these that
were bred to tolerate certain vine pests or soil conditions. They have exciting names like
3309, 110R, and SO4.
   How does rootstock affect vine growth? Rootstocks can be high vigor or low vigor, can
have shallow or deep roots, can be drought resistant or tolerate wetter conditions, and can
be more or less tolerant of certain soil pests or other soil conditions. Selecting the best
root-stock for a given location can therefore be one of the most critical decisions the
grower must make. Of all the subjects currently being aggressively researched, rootstock
is considered by many viticulturists to be one of the next big keys to understanding why a
given wine tastes the way it does.

                          THE SEX LIFE OF WINE GRAPES
         Each spring, there’s a lot of sex in the vineyards. Strictly between the vines, of course.
         Cultivated vines are hermaphroditic (the reproductive organs of both sexes are
         simultaneously present). Thus, come spring, grapevines pollinate themselves. But only
         if the moment is right. Grapevines, as it turns out, are rather particular. Too much wind?
         Forget it. A little chill in the air? The grapevines get a headache. Rain? May as well take
         a cold shower. Only when it’s calm, peaceful, and perfectly warm, will grapevines
         procreate. The tender process is called flowering, and indeed, if all goes well, tiny white
         flowers will result. With time, these tiny white flowers will become clusters of grapes.
         But if circumstances go awry and no flowers appear, there will be no grapes. (Sorry,
         buddy.) With wild grapevines (as opposed to cultivated ones), the situation is different.
         Wild vines are usually either female or male, although a small percentage are naturally
         hermaphroditic. As a result, wild female plants can produce fruit only if there is a wild
         male nearby that can provide pollen. (Male plants, alas, are barren and fruitless.)
            Botanists suspect that the first peoples to have cultivated grapevines—perhaps as
         long ago as 7000 to 5000 B.C.—would have initially selected only female plants, since
         these would have been the fruitful ones. Ultimately, however, the females, without any
         males whatsoever, would have been unproductive too. Thus, over time, the vines
         chosen for cultivation (and propagation) would have been the vines that naturally
         possessed both female and male sex organs. It’s good to be a hermaphrodite.
    FARMING FOR FLAVOR: PRUNING, TRELLISING,
             SPACING, PICKING, YIELD

Americans traveling in Europe for the first time often drive past vineyards having no idea
what they are. Unlike something immediately recognizable no matter where you are—say,
a rose bush—vines can come in a dizzying array of shapes and sizes. Vineyards in
Burgundy, France; Sonoma, California; and the province of Galicia, in Spain, look about
as similar as Abraham Lincoln, Winston Churchill, and Julia Roberts (not necessarily in
that order).

                            BIODYNAMIC VITICULTURE
         While biodynamic methods have been used by farmers for centuries, the term
         biodynamics came into use in the 1920s and was based on the teachings of the
         Austrian philosopher Rudolf Steiner and his student Maria Thun. Sometimes described
         as a “spiritual science,” biodynamic farming involves managing a farm holistically as a
         regenerative living organism. Vines are fertilized using compost created on the farm,
         and soils are regenerated naturally through the waste droppings of farm and ranch
         animals. Harmful pests are controlled by encouraging a population of beneficial pests
         that feed on them, creating a “living balance.” Biodynamic practioners envision plants
         as existing in a “middle kingdom” influenced from below by the forces of the earth and
         governed from above by solar and astral forces. Thus, vineyard practices such as
         pruning are done according to the movement of the moon through the twelve houses of
         the zodiac. The goal of biodynamics is to align all of the forces of Nature, creating a
         natural harmony.

    The size and shape of the vine is the result primarily of the grape variety and the
climate, but the way vines are pruned, trellised, and spaced is also critical. Pruning is the
exhausting process of cutting back the vines while they are dormant during the winter.
Although nothing might seem more boring, viticulturists consider pruning to be both an
art and a science, and experienced pruners often adopt a zenlike contentment after
spending several cold and rather solitary weeks in a starkly barren vineyard during the
winter. What the pruner decides to leave becomes the basis for the next year’s crop. If
pruned too severely, the vines’ fruitfulness and strength may be compromised. Conversely,
if pruned too little, the vines will push out too many shoots and leaves and produce too
much fruit and become unbalanced. The overabundance of fruit will mean the crop will
have a hard time ripening, and this in turn could lead to fewer shoots and stunted growth
in subsequent seasons.
   In many parts of the world, especially where there are old vineyards, vines still grow
out of the ground like short, stubby bushes. In most modern vineyards, however, the vines
are trellised up on wires. The rationale behind trellising is simple. By lifting the vines up
and spreading the canopy along wires, the leaves get the sun they need for photosynthesis,
but at the same time, the grapes hang freely in the air where, less shaded, they get enough
sunlight for ripeness, and good air circulation to mitigate against rot.
     SUSTAINABLE AND ORGANIC: A FARM FOR THE FUTURE
 In the first decade of the twenty-first century, the movement toward eco-friendly grape-growing
 accelerated worldwide. “Green viticulture,” as it’s known, generally falls under one of three concepts:
 sustainable, organic, or biodynamic (see box on the facing page).
 SUSTAINABLE VITICULTURE Voluntarily practiced by conscientious winegrowers worldwide,
 sustainable viticulture has no single definition or legal requirements. Vintners decide for themselves
 which farming practices to implement, and which to avoid, in order to create an integrated farming
 system capable of sustaining itself indefinitely.
 ORGANIC VITICULTURE Organically grown grapes are those grown without the use of artificial
 fertilizers, engineered plant materials, or synthetic chemicals, including pesticides, fungicides, herbicides,
 or soil fumigants. In many countries, vineyards and farms that have met organic standards for a given
 period of time may subsequently be certified as having done so. “Organic wine” is different. In the United
 States, for example, USDA regulations stipulate that organic wine must be made from organic grapes
 and, in addition, sulfites cannot be added to the wine. (Sulfites, natural antimicrobial agents, help prevent
 spoilage and act as a preservative.) Winemakers who grow grapes organically but use small amounts of
 sulfites cannot use the term organic wine, but can say their wine has been made with organically grown
 grapes.

   The spacing of vines, like trellising, has become something of a mini science that must
take into consideration the site. In the past, vines were spaced with only one factor in
mind: economics. In Europe, this often meant only as much space between the vines or
rows as necessary to admit a man with a basket on his back, or a horse-drawn plow. By the
1960s in California, spacing at larger intervals, usually 8 feet (2 meters) between vines and
12 feet (4 meters) between rows, neatly accommodated all sorts of machines and tractors,
including those pulling gondolas into which the harvested grapes would be dumped.
   But spacing has implications far beyond such simple economic issues as size or type of
tractor and equipment. The closer vines are spaced, the more their roots may have to
compete for the same soil, nutrients, and water. If the vines are too vigorous, this
competition may be beneficial, acting to slow down the vines’ growth, limit the number of
grape clusters produced, and bring the vines into a better balance. The better balanced the
vineyard, of course, the better the grapes and, all things being equal, the better the wine.
   In California, the vines in many new and replanted vineyards are now placed much
closer together. Twenty years ago, an acre of California vineyard typically contained four
hundred to six hundred or so vines. With closer planting, the range is now from six
hundred to nearly three thousand vines per acre (and sometimes even more). Importantly
however, the overall yield of grapes is about the same because in closely spaced
vineyards, the vines are kept quite small. The goal, in other words, is not to increase yield
(more on this in a moment) but rather to increase competition between vines and hence
quality.
   The romantic vision of grapes lovingly picked by hand is, in many cases, just that—a
romantic vision. Mechanical harvesting is being used with increasing frequency
throughout the world. It has both drawbacks and advantages over handpicking. First, a
machine can never be as selective or careful as a person. Mechanical harvesters can break
and damage the skins of grapes, as well as the vines themselves if the plants are young.
Second, even though modern mechanical harvesters are calibrated to distinguish between
ripe and unripe grapes, some unripe grapes and material other than grapes (MOG) still get
picked.
   On the other hand, mechanical harvesters have some very real assets. They can operate
twenty-four hours a day, ensuring that large vineyards can be picked swiftly once the
grapes reach ripeness. A mechanical harvester can pick up to 300 tons of grapes in an
eight-hour day, compared to the 2 tons picked by the average California harvest worker
(admittedly still a breathtaking amount for one person in just one day). Speed is critical if
bad weather is about to break. And with machines, large tracts of vineyard can be
harvested at night, a real advantage in very warm climates, since cool nighttime
temperatures help preserve the fruit’s freshness. (Handpickers with appropriate lights can
also work at night, but on a smaller scale.) Finally, apart from the initial outlay of capital
to purchase a mechanical harvester (in 2012, they cost about half a million U.S. dollars
each), mechanical harvesting is usually less expensive than handpicking, and is critical in
wine regions with limited availability of labor, such as Australia.
   And finally in this chapter, we come to yield. Are quantity and quality mutually
exclusive? This is a very complex question, the answer to which can only be: sometimes.
On the one hand, it does sound reasonable that growing, say, 3 tons of grapes on an acre of
land rather than 10 tons would result in more intensely flavored grapes. And to support
this, many of the greatest wine estates in the world limit (to some degree) the yield from
their vineyards, though it can seem counterintuitive, if not sacrilegious, to discard what
Nature and man have together worked so hard to foster.
   Even so, there is no perfect linear correlation between yield and flavor. In the Napa
Valley, for example, fantastic cabernet sauvignons are made from vineyards that yield 2
tons per acre—as well as from vineyards with yields double that. Another good example is
the Champagne region of France, where top wines often come from vineyards that yield
more than 5 tons per acre.
    All of this said, “tons per acre” may eventually fade from the lexicon of quality. Today,
viticulturists worldwide have telescoped down to finer measurements based on each
individual vine. How many clusters does the vine support? What is the weight of each
cluster? Most important, what size are the berries? (A high ratio of skin to juice promises
lots of concentrated aroma, flavor, and structure.) As one viticulturist told me during
harvest, “They may be grapes, but when they’re great, they look like blueberries.”
   In the end, each vineyard must be viewed as its own entity and every factor must be
considered before any specific assessments can be made of yield. How strong the vines
are, how old the vineyard is, the characteristics of the vineyard’s terroir, the intensity of
prevailing stress factors, the type of grapes grown—all of these dramatically influence the
quality that can be derived from any given yield. Despite all other contingencies, we do
know this: For every vineyard, there is a breaking point—a point where too many grapes
will cause the vineyard to be out of balance and where the subsequent quality of the wine
will plummet.
 They may look a little industrial, but stainless-steel tanks transformed winemaking when they first began to be widely
used in the 1960s. Eventually, the tanks were “jacketed” (like the ones above), allowing them to be cooled or heated to
                                           control fermentations more precisely.
HOW WINE IS MADE

Wine has been with us for more than six thousand years. Yet the natural, complex process
by which it is made—fermentation—has been understood for only a little more than 160
years. It was not until the 1850s, when Louis Pasteur’s research in microbiology linked
sugar’s conversion to alcohol (fermentation) to the living organisms called yeasts, that
winemaking moved out of the realm of the occult and into the realm of science. More than
a century more would pass before the next significant advances in wine-making occurred.




   Up until World War II, most wines were made according to two classic methods, one
for white wine, the other for red. The only exceptions were fortified wines, such as Sherry
and Port, and sparkling wines, such as Champagne—all of which were made in
specialized, complex ways of their own. By the 1960s, advances in winemaking around
the world, plus the advent of more sophisticated winemaking equipment—especially
temperature-controlled stainless steel tanks—meant that winemakers possessed a far
greater ability to influence a wine’s aromas, flavors, texture, and finish. A powerful new
world of winemaking was born. In this chapter we look at how mere grape juice becomes
the stuff of poetry and legend.
Heat and alcohol generated during fermentation act as solvents, pulling red color out of the skins and tinting the juice
                                                       red.
  WHY IS WHITE WINE WHITE AND RED WINE RED?

While starting this section with the question above might seem almost too basic, over the
years I’ve found that most people don’t get the answer quite right. It isn’t just “because of
the skins.”
   The juice of all grapes, red and white, is almost colorless (with a few rare exceptions).
Thus, red skins alone do not make red wine red. The big difference between red wine and
white wine is this: For red wine, the juice is fermented with the red grape skins. During
fermentation, heat and alcohol are generated. Both are solvents that help leach out the
reddish-purple color pigments from the skins, tinting the surrounding wine. In the absence
of this heat and alcohol, “red” wine in a fermentation vessel would actually be a pinkish
liquid with red skins floating around in it.
   With white wine, the skins aren’t necessary to tint the juice (it’s already clear), plus the
skins might add tannin, an undesirable element in white wine. So, in making white wine,
the skins are quickly separated from the juice before the juice is fermented.
                           MAKING DRY RED WINE

As we’ve just seen, since red wines are fermented with the grape skins present, red wines
contain substantially more tannin than white wines (see the tannin section in What Makes
Wine, Wine?, page 9). Tannin figures into the first decision that must be made in red
winemaking, namely: Should the stems be removed from the grapes before they are
crushed? It’s important to know that grape stems also contain tannin. With grapes that
already have a lot of tannin in their skins (cabernet sauvignon, for example), stems can
add excessive tannin to the juice. As a result, the stems are usually removed by putting the
grape bunches into a machine called a crusher-destemmer. With less-tannic varieties, such
as grenache from the Rhône Valley or pinot noir from Burgundy, winemakers may choose
to leave the stems on precisely because they do add a bit of tannic strength.
    The soupy mass of crushed grapes, juice, skins, pulp, seeds, and possibly stems is
called the must. In the old days before stainless steel tanks were invented, this would be
fermented in large wooden vats, which would be used over and over again. Today, most
red wine is fermented in stainless steel or concrete tanks, which are both easier to control
in terms of temperature and easier to clean—someone, after all, is going to have to muck
out all those skins and seeds when the whole process is done. (As an aside, a small number
of prestigious, expensive cabernet sauvignons and Bordeaux-style wines are now being
fermented in new wooden barrels or new wooden vats. Though very labor intensive,
fermenting a red wine in a barrel allows oxygen to have a role in the process, and is
thought to result in a more soft-textured wine.)

                                    A FEAST OF YEASTS
         Yeasts, forty thousand of which could fit on the head of a pin, are single-cell organisms
         that are part of the fungus family. Yeasts reproduce by “budding.” One mother cell will
         bud about twelve times, creating a new daughter cell each time, before the mother
         eventually dies. Various strains of yeasts exist naturally in vineyard soils, cling to
         grapes as they grow, and are present in the air and on the surfaces of wine cellars. As
         winemakers unknowingly did throughout most of history, some winemakers today allow
         these ambient, or “native,” strains of yeasts to carry out fermentation. In effect, the
         strains slowly compete with one another to consume the sugar in the juice. This
         process takes time (often weeks), during which desirable aromas and flavors in the
         wine may be created. But the opposite may be true, too: Ambient yeasts may produce
         funky, “off” aromas. They are often not just slow, but sluggish about fermenting. If a
         fermentation takes too much time getting started, the juice may be harmed by spoilage
         bacteria or other microorganisms. To end-run these worries, many winemakers prefer to
         use a strain of cultured yeasts, which can be depended on to multiply quickly at a given
         temperature. There are many strains of cultured yeasts. A winemaker’s choice depends
         on how fast and intense he wants the fermentation to be. This, in turn, may subtly affect
         the flavors and aromas of the wine.

   Before fermentation begins, the winemaker has another choice to make. Instead of
proceeding immediately, he may decide to chill the tank down and let the juice “cold
soak” for a few hours or days. During this time, the skins will ever so slowly and gently
release a small amount of tannin, aroma, and flavor compounds. Since fermentation has
not yet begun, no heat or alcohol are present, and the extraction effect is therefore subtle.
That said, putting a wine through a cold soak is definitely intended to make the wine a bit
more intense than it otherwise would have been.
   Like any place where regular fermentations occur, a cellar is full of ambient yeasts.
With the help of these yeasts, a mass of crushed grapes left alone will turn itself into wine.
A winemaker, however, may choose to use cultured yeasts, thereby gaining control over
the onset and rate of fermentation. Something as simple as the speed at which
fermentation proceeds can profoundly affect the flavor of the wine. Slower fermentations,
for example, often produce more complex and aromatic wines.
   The next step is the actual fermentation, a furious chemical reaction during which the
wine can almost look like it’s boiling (you can actually hear it). As the yeasts begin to
convert the grape sugar into alcohol, heat is thrown off and carbon dioxide bubbles up
from the fermenting mass, pushing the skins to the surface, where they form a thick “cap”
over the liquid.
   Unattended, the skins will remain at the surface of the liquid, pushed from underneath
by the tremendous pressure of the CO2 for as long as fermentation continues. This
presents a problem. Since the skins contain the wine’s potential color and tannin, as well
as compounds that become aromas and flavors, it’s critical that they be mixed with the
pinkishwhite juice below. Indeed, the more the cap is broken up, pushed apart and
squished down into the juice, the more color, tannin, flavor, and aroma can be extracted.




 Small amounts of wine evaporate through the oak staves of a barrel, creating a dangerous “head space” of air which
could cause the wine to oxidize. To keep the barrels full to the top (and keep air out), winemakers regularly “top off” the
                                                           barrels.

   Sometimes (especially with fragile grapes like pinot noir), winemakers do this by
“punching down,” which, despite its name, is considered a gentle method. The winemaker
simply takes a pizza paddle–like pole and pushes the skins under the surface of the liquid,
breaking up the cap in the process. A similar technique, stripping off most of one’s clothes,
hopping into the tank, and using one’s feet and legs as paddles, worked for centuries.
   The cap can also be broken up by a technique called pumping over. In this case, a large
hose is run from the bottom of the tank to the top, where the juice is sprayed over the thick
mantle of skins and percolates through the cap, picking up color, tannin, aroma, and
flavor.
   During fermentation, the temperature of the must rises to between 60°F (16°C) and
85°F (29°C). The winemaker does not want it to rise above 85°F, for at higher
temperatures the delicate aromas and flavors of the wine may be volatilized, or burned off.
   After virtually all of the sugar has become alcohol (a process that usually takes from
several days to a few weeks) the wine is said to be dry. At this point, the wine will usually
contain anywhere from 10 to 16 percent alcohol. In any case, wine cannot, by natural
methods, be much more than 16.5 percent alcohol. At about this concentration, the yeasts
die by being poisoned by the very alcohol they created. Near the end of or after the
alcoholic fermentation, all red wines go through a months’ long transformation called
malolactic fermentation. The process is crucial to a red wine’s softness and microbial
stability. (I’ve described it in full in the section on Making Dry White Wine, page 43,
because I think it’s easier to understand in the context of white wine.)
   Once a red wine has finished fermenting, the winemaker once again has a decision to
make. Should the wine be drained off the skins or be allowed to sit with those skins for
several more hours, or even days. This post-fermentation maceration (sometimes called
extended maceration) is a little like letting a warm homemade stock sit and “marinate”
longer with the meat bones and vegetables. In the case of wine, even more color, tannin,
aroma, and flavor are extracted from the skins. The winemaker must be extremely careful,
however, because at this point the wine is indeed wine, meaning that it contains alcohol,
which will act as a powerful solvent. A little too much maceration at this point could mean
a wine that is teeth-grittingly tannic and bitter beyond words.
                     WARNING: THIS LABEL IS MISLEADING
 “Contains Sulfites.” With the initiation of that federally mandated warning label in 1988, wine drinkers
 began to worry. What were sulfites and why were they suddenly being put into wine? In the confusion
 that followed, wine was blamed for everything from headaches to rashes.
    The facts are these: Wine has always contained sulfites. The compounds occur as a natural by-
 product of fermentation. Historically, winemakers have also added small, controlled amounts of sulfites to
 wine to prevent oxidation and spoilage.
    Widespread concern over sulfites first occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s, with the dawn of the
 salad bar. Cut vegetables and fruits were routinely sprayed with large amounts of sulfites (up to 2,000
 parts per million—[ppm]) to keep them from wilting and turning brown. The FDA received reports of cases
 of adverse reactions from several hundred people. In response, strict regulations were enacted to protect
 the estimated 0.4 percent to 1 percent of the population, most of them severe asthmatics, who are
 considered at risk.
    Historically, however, the regulations on sulfites in wine have been stricter than those applied to salad
 bars. In wine the upper limit is 350 ppm. In practice, most wines today contain 100 ppm or less. In
 wineries where the grapes are healthy and unbruised, and where sterilized equipment is used, the
 amount of sulfites in the wine may be far less. Several wines around the world are now made entirely
 without added sulfites. And, of course, wine isn’t the only product in the sulfite discussion.
    Sulfites are found in beer, cocktail mixes, cookies, crackers, pizza crust, flour tortillas, pickles, relishes,
 salad dressings, olives, vinegar, sugar, shrimp, scallops, dried fruit, and fruit juice, among other foods
 and beverages.
    When sulphur is used in winemaking in small, judicious doses, it cannot be smelled or tasted. Nor is it
 responsible for headaches, according to scientists. Current research suggests that wine-related
 headaches are probably more often the result of a simple imbalance: More alcohol has been consumed
 than water. And there’s another possibility as the culprit—glycoproteins. Discovered in 2010 by Italian
 scientists, glycoproteins are proteins coated with sugars and are produced naturally as grapes ferment.
 The Italian research team found that many grape glycoproteins have structures similar to known
 allergens, including proteins that trigger allergic reactions to ragweed and latex.


   Finally ready to be separated from the skins for good, the wine is drained off to begin
the aging process. This wine, known as free run, is the best possible, and all luxury wines
are made from it. The remaining mixture of wine and solids is gently pressed to release
additional wine. This lightly pressed juice (called first press) may not be as virginal as free
run, but it often contains valuable tannin, as well as flavor and aroma components.
   Fruity red wines meant to be quaffed but not contemplated will usually be kept for a
few months in a tank or vat, then bottled. More serious reds will go into small barrels for
periods ranging from several months to a few years, depending on the potential
complexity and structure of the wine. The barrels are virtually always oak. In them,
complex chemical interactions will take place that gradually and subtly alter the wine’s
aroma, flavor, and texture (see What Oak Does, page 48).
   An important part of barrel aging is the racking of the wine. Racking is simply the
process of allowing solids to settle to the bottom of the vat or barrel, then pouring or
drawing the clear wine off. Depending on the grape variety, a red wine may be racked
numerous times as various types of solids continue to precipitate out. Racking also aerates
the wine, helping it mature.
    During aging, there’s another winemaking process that is sometimes utilized: fining.
Fining helps remove excessive tannin, thus, hopefully, making the wine softer and less
bitter, and improving its balance. Fining can also clarify minute solids such as unstable
proteins, which may be suspended in the wine. There are several types of fining agents,
most of which are protein coagulants—egg whites, casein (a milk protein), gelatin (made
from skin, tendon, and muscle), and—hardest of all to imagine—isinglass (a gelatinous
substance derived from the air bladders of sturgeon). To fine a wine, the coagulant is
stirred into the wine. Like one half of a Velcro patch, the coagulant immediately attaches
itself (in this case, chemically) to the tannin, which acts like the other piece of the Velcro.
Together, the coagulant and the tannin form molecules that are too heavy to remain in
suspension, and thus fall to the bottom of the barrel. The wine can then be racked. (So, in
case you were wondering, no egg whites, milk, gelatin, or fish bladders remain in the
wine.) The choice of which type of fining agent to use is an important one. A wine fined
with egg whites may taste entirely different from the same wine fined with gelatin—not
because the fining agent itself contributes flavor, but because each fining agent is made up
of different-size protein molecules that attach themselves to different things in the wine.
Egg whites, for example, are widely used in Bordeaux and are considered excellent at
pulling out excessive tannin. Another fining agent—activated carbon (derived from
charcoal)—pulls out so many things, it can leave a wine stripped down to the point where
it smells and tastes completely neutral. Indeed, activated carbon is usually used only in
extreme cases, as when a wine has been adversely affected by smoke (so-called smoke
taint has been problematic a few times in the past decade in wine areas prone to massive
forest fires).
                       NOT ROMANTIC BUT REVOLUTIONARY
 No single entity has had a more profound impact on white wine than the temperature-controlled stainless
 steel tank. In such tanks, fermentation can take place slowly and at a cool temperature, resulting in white
 wines with fruity aromas and great delicacy.
    Before the tank’s invention in the latter half of the twentieth century, many of the world’s white wines
 tasted slightly oxidized and flat. The best white wines came, virtually without exception, from Germany,
 and from Champagne and northern Burgundy in France, where the naturally cold climates preserved the
 wines’ freshness and finesse.
    In 1912, the giant German industrial conglomerate Krupp filed for a patent on the first chrome-nickel-
 steel-molybdenum tank. This stainless steel tank was not refrigerated, but it resisted corrosion from acids
 far better than its predecessor, the simple chrome-steel tank. Still, it would be several decades before the
 technology to cool such huge tanks would be invented and the temperature-controlled stainless steel
 tank would become a common sight in European wineries.
    In the United States, the first non-refrigerated stainless steel tanks were probably those commissioned
 by Gallo after World War II. Finally, in the 1950s, advanced rotary compressors capable of refrigerating
 25,000-gallon tanks became commercially available (and affordable). By the late 1960s, temperature-
 controlled stainless steel tanks were a fixture in every American winery serious about white wine.




In addition to stainless-steel vessels and oak barrels, wines are sometimes made in concrete eggs, which look like giant
                                                        Easter eggs.

    After oak aging and (possibly) fining, but before bottling, a wine may be filtered.
Highly controversial, filtering has generated so many invectives you’d think the subject
was taxes. The facts are these: There are times when a wine must be filtered to avoid
being spoiled by bacteria, and other times when filtering is undesirable as it may result in
a lesser wine. The art is knowing whether to filter, and exactly which method to use so
that the wine is improved, not harmed. Filtering helps to stabilize a wine microbiologically
and helps clarify it by removing suspended particles. Excessive filtering, however, also
removes desirable particles and thus strips the wine of some of its flavor and aroma.
   There are several types of filters, most of which work in a similar manner. In one
commonly used type, the wine is pumped through a series of porous pads made of simple
cellulose fibers. The pores of the pads may be wide or narrow. In what is called a loose
polish filtration, wide-pore pads are used to clarify a wine without removing flavors and
aromas. Pads with smaller pores remove smaller particles. Filtered tightly enough, a wine
can be made to taste as bland and boring as sliced white bread.
   Finally, after filtering (or not), the wine is bottled, often to be aged yet again. In a
bottle, the water and alcohol can’t evaporate and, assuming the cork is sound, oxygen
cannot readily penetrate. The bottle itself, unlike a barrel, is sterile and chemically inert. In
the bottle, the components in the wine interact alone, slowly coalescing into harmony.
Together, barrel and bottle aging work synergistically toward a level of optimal maturity.
The greatest red wines in the world always experience both barrel (oxidative) and bottle
(reductive) aging.
   Before moving on to how white wine is made, let me add that most red wines in the
world roughly follow the process outlined above. There’s one well-known exception:
Beaujolais, which is made according to a second method called carbonic maceration (see
the Beaujolais chapter for how carbonic maceration works, page 228).
                       MAKING DRY WHITE WINE

Although conscientious winemakers everywhere take enormous care to harvest all types of
grapes quickly and as carefully as possible, white grapes require special speed and
handling. Crushing grapes on the way to the winery can cause the skins to leak tannin into
the juice, which can make a white wine taste coarse. Bruised, warm, sun-beaten white
grapes also risk losing their delicate range of fresh aromas and flavors. As a result,
winemakers in warm climates like much of Australia and California are often adamant
about harvesting white grapes when the grapes themselves are coolest—at night or in the
early morning. Once at the winery, the grapes may be chilled before any winemaking
process begins.
   As we’ve seen, in making red wine, the color-packed skins remain with the juice during
fermentation and are only removed when fermentation is finished. With white wine,
however, the juice is separated from its skins immediately, well before fermentation
begins. To obtain the juice, whole bunches of white grapes are put directly into a press, or
may be put into a crusher-destemmer that removes the stems first. The press itself is often
what is called a bladder press—a large cylinder in the center of which a pliable air tube is
suspended (the bladder). As the bladder is inflated with air, it slowly pushes the grapes
against the fine screen inside the press. The grapes are squeezed so gently that the stems
and seeds are not broken.
   Once the grapes are pressed, the juice is transferred to a settling tank so that particles in
suspension (mostly minute pieces of grape pulp) can sink to the bottom. In large wineries,
this may be done more quickly by filtering or centrifuging the juice instead. Regardless of
the method used, once the settling process is finished, the clean juice is ready to be
fermented.
    As is true of red wine, white wine will ferment on its own as a result of ambient yeasts
in the environment. Some winemakers, however, prefer to introduce a yeast culture,
making the process of fermentation a surer, faster bet, and easier to control.
   Either way, much effort is made to keep the fermenting juice cold (again, the idea is to
preserve freshness and aroma). Thus, white wines are often fermented in temperature-
controlled fermentation tanks, so they ferment at 50°F to 65°F (10°C to 18°C)—as
opposed to 75°F to 85°F (24°C to 29°C) for red wines. Temperature-controlled stainless
steel tanks are usually double-skinned, wrapped on the outside with a cooling jacket
through which glycol runs.
   Although temperature-controlled stainless steel tanks preserve a white wine’s freshness
and delicacy, some grapes—notably chardonnay—can benefit from being fermented in
small oak barrels.
   During barrel fermentation, the barrel is filled about three-quarters full to prevent the
wine from foaming over. As the wine ferments, the temperature rises to 70°F (21°C) or
more. Some fresh fruit aromas and flavors are sacrificed, but in the warm tango of
fermentation, the yeasts help pull toasty, sweet, vanillin flavors from the wood, creating
the barrel-fermented style. (To keep the white wine from getting too hot during barrel
fermentation, you can bet winemakers in warm climates have the AC cranked way up in
the fermentation room.)
   At first thought, it might seem as though a barrel-fermented white wine would also take
on an undesirable amount of tannin from the barrel itself. Curiously, this is not the case.
During fermentation the developing wine does extract tannin lodged in the staves. But
when fermentation is complete and the spent yeast cells (lees) are removed from the wine,
many of the wood tannins cling to them and are removed as well.
   When a white wine fermentation is nearly or totally complete, and the sugar in the juice
has been mostly converted to alcohol, the winemaker may decide to initiate another
amazing chemical transformation: malolactic fermentation (ML for short). Importantly,
this months-long process is carried out by bacteria (Oenococcus oeni)—unlike the
alcoholic fermentation, which is done by yeasts. What happens is simple: The bacteria
convert the malic acid in the wine to lactic acid. Why do we care? Because malic acid has
an extremely tart mouthfeel (imagine the crunchy acid in a crisp green apple). Lactic acid,
on the other hand, has a mouthfeel that is much softer (imagine the acidity in milk). Thus,
the goal of malolactic fermentation is to change the way the wine will feel on the palate. A
wine that has undergone malolactic fermentation has a texture that’s creamy.
Having put so much meticulous work into growing grapes well, then transforming them into fine wine, few vintners want
to see their wines served in anything less than a generous, well-shaped glass. Above, Riedel’s Sommelier Series glasses
                                                     for white wine.

   The story doesn’t stop there. During malolactic fermentation, a by-product called
diacetyl (die-ASS-i-tuhl) is produced. Diacetyl is the molecule that makes butter taste
buttery. So, wines that have experienced malolactic fermentation—like chardonnay—are
often buttery. Or, to turn the binoculars around: When a wine is described as tasting like
buttered popcorn, that flavor came not from the grapes themselves, but from malolactic
fermentation.
   Mashed potatoes aside, not everything is better when it’s creamy and buttery.
Malolactic fermentation is intentionally not done with grape varieties like riesling, that
take their character from piercing snappiness and the purity of their fruit flavors. Would
anyone slather butter on a fresh, lively fruit salad?
   In addition, even with wines that have gone through malolactic fermentation and
become softer, the winemaker may be able to lessen the buttery diacetyl flavor. (Really
expensive chardonnays, for example, are often creamy but don’t taste like buttered
popcorn). The technique involves leaving the wine in the barrel for several days after the
malolactic fermentation is complete, but before the wine is dosed with the antimicrobial
agent sulfur dioxide (most wine usually is given a bit of SO2 immediately after malolactic
fermentation). During this few-day period, the yeasts remaining in the juice will
metabolize the diacetyl, eating it up as a food source. Thus, diacetyl can disappear from a
wine as naturally as it appeared. As an aside, I’ve used chardonnay as an example here,
but it’s worth noting that red wines can also taste buttery. Most do not, since the diacetyl
flavor is masked by stronger flavors such as those contributed by tannin. But occasionally
a red wine will taste buttery and the effect is, to me, unpleasantly jarring.
  So, how do you know for sure if a wine has gone through malolactic fermentation? You
don’t. Its flavor and texture may inspire a hunch. But the technique is usually not listed on
the label.
    In addition to being barrel fermented, full-bodied white wines, such as chardonnay,
may also be left sur lie, a French term meaning “on the lees,” or “on the spent yeast cells.”
(As a result of the hard work of fermentation, yeasts partially disintegrate and become
what is known in English as lees.) During this process, the wine rests in contact with a
thick layer of lees that have settled at the bottom of the barrel. In effect, the wines are
marinating on the yeasts. This process adds a slightly richer texture and sometimes more
complexity to the wine. To accentuate the effect, the lees may also be regularly stirred up
into the wine. (Continuing the culinary metaphor, this would be like basting.) A white
wine such as a good-quality chardonnay typically spends four to twelve months in contact
with its lees before the wine is finally racked off. The lees themselves will then be filtered
to recover as much wine as possible. As for the lees solids (which now look like a thick
brown milkshake), they will be thrown away.
                               HOW BARRELS ARE MADE
It’s estimated that approximately 100,000 to 200,000 new wine barrels are sold each year in North
America alone. The story of how each was made begins with the tree from which the wood came.
   A tree, like a grapevine, is affected by climate. In cold, dry climates, a tree grows slowly, forming a
narrow growth ring for that year. In wetter, warmer climates, a tree grows more quickly and the growth
ring is wider. The widths of all the rings together become the wood’s grain.




                           Barrels, like great wine, are made in an artisanal manner.
  As far as wine is concerned, oak flavors are extracted more gradually from tight grained (narrow ring)
oak trees. And these, as noted, always come from cool, dry forests. Winemakers generally prefer barrels
made from tight-grained oak, since the oak’s impact on the wine is usually better integrated and more
mellow.
   Thus, barrels made from trees that grow in the cool, dry French forests of Tronçais, Vosges, and
Nevers are highly sought after. The forest of Tronçais, in particular, was planted in the late 1600s as a
source of superior ship masts for the French navy. Although American oak is not designated by the forest
from which it came, the best American oak also comes from cool places, such as Minnesota, Missouri,
Wisconsin, and Iowa.
   In addition to the species of oak used (French or American), the manner in which a barrel is made
significantly affects the flavor of a wine. An oak tree is generally harvested when it is 150 to 250 years
old. In practical terms, this means that some forests being harvested today are made up of trees that
were growing when the U.S. Constitution was signed in 1787.
   For centuries, the traditional European practice—still used today by the best coopers—has been to
hand split the oak into staves along natural grain lines, then air-dry the staves by leaving them stacked
outdoors in a stave yard, exposed to air, sun, rain, snow, wind, fungi, and microbes for two to four years.
Traditionally, the stacks are dismantled and restacked once a year so that all of the staves have similar
exposure to the elements. During this seasoning period, the wood’s physio-chemical composition
changes and, among other benefits, the harshest tannin is gradually leached out of the wood.
                     Pieces of oak wood are used for the fire over which the barrel is made.
   After years of seasoning, the staves will be built into barrels. Historically this was done entirely by
hand, but today machinery is used for parts of the process. First, the large staves will be planed into
slightly smaller staves that can be fit together as tightly as possible, since an imperfect seam could result
in a leaky barrel. To make the wood pliable enough to bend into a barrel shape, a cooper uses the
traditional method and heats the staves over an open fire pot. Since the fire in the pot can reach 800°F to
1,000°F (430°C to 540°C), and the temperature of the wood, 350°F to 400°F (180°C to 200°C), the
outside of the staves are constantly swabbed with a wet mop, ensuring that the wood doesn’t burst into
flames. As the wood groans and softens, it is pulled into a barrel shape with the help of winches and
chains, as well as iron hoops that must be hammered into place and act like belts holding the staves
together. It is backbreaking, hot, deafening work. (The saws are extremely loud.) If he does everything by
hand, a top cooper working swiftly can make just one barrel a day.




                     The fire reaches temperatures of 800°F to 1,000°F (427°C to 538°C).
   After the barrel is built, it will be exposed to a fire again, this time to “toast” the inside. The fire
caramelizes the wood’s natural carbohydrates (think of a tree as a giant vegetable), bringing out
compounds such as vanillin, a molecule that occurs naturally in oak. Vanillin in oak tastes remarkably like
vanilla (which comes from the pods of a tropical plant). From this caramelization, the wine will ultimately
take on a complex repertoire of flavors that are toasty, charred, spicy, and sweet. Depending on the
degree and character of the flavors they want to impart, winemakers can order their barrels—like
breakfast toast in a coffee shop—lightly, moderately, or heavily toasted. A lightly toasted barrel spends
about twenty-five minutes over the fire; heavily toasted, up to an hour.
    In addition to this traditional European method, there is a second method—one which, while sharply
criticized today, has been used extensively, especially in the past for American oak barrels. In this
method, the staves are dried over a few months in a kiln rather than outdoors over the course of years.
Although expeditious, kiln drying does not have the tannin-leaching or seasoning effect that air drying
has. As a result, kiln-dried barrels tend to impart coarse flavors. This doesn’t matter too much if the liquid
inside is bourbon, but if it’s pinot noir, the result can taste terrible.




      Iron hoops hold the staves together. The hoops are hammered into place using a medieval-looking tool.
    In addition, the staves for American barrels were traditionally bent over steam rather than fire. Barrels
with steam-bent staves impart a raw, less complex, less toasty character to wine than barrels made from
fire-bent staves. (Think of the difference between boiled beef and grilled beef.)
   The world of American oak barrel making has changed, however. Since the mid-1990s, some
American oak barrels (the best ones) have been made according to the traditional European method.
American oak remains, of course, a different species than French oak, and thus the core flavors will
always be slightly different. But American oak barrels are no longer the stepchildren they once were.
                                 ENCHANTED FORESTS
         At the beginning of the Middle Ages, more than two thirds of France was covered in oak
         forests. Alas, these began to rapidly disappear as the twelfth century dawned. The
         population was growing; wood was the fuel of iron smiths; wars meant the French navy
         needed a continual supply of wood for ships and masts. In 1285, Philippe I nationalized
         the country’s forests and established the Bureau of Water and Forestry to ensure a
         steady supply of materials for national defense. Over the next seven centuries,
         France’s oak forests (many of which were geographically defined and given specific
         names) were among the country’s greatest economic assets. Today, 25 percent of the
         land in France is still covered by nationally owned oak forest—some 35 million acres
         (14 million hectares). Preserved and painstakingly managed by the Office National des
         Forêts, these forests show no signs of declining—nor does the price of a French oak
         barrel.

    At this point, most white wines are cold stabilized—quickly chilled down to a point
slightly above freezing for a period of several days. The purpose of this process is to shock
the wine just enough for tartaric acid to precipitate out of the wine in the form of solid,
small, snowflake-like crystals. The clear wine can then be racked off the crystals. If
you’ve ever seen these crystals on the underside of a cork or in the bottom of your glass,
you have encountered a wine that has not been cold stabilized by the winemaker. No
matter, really: The crystals are harmless and tasteless. (If you pulverized them, you’d have
cream of tartar.)
   After cold stabilization, some white wines, like red wines, are aged in oak, although for
considerably shorter periods. Oak aging (especially when the barrels are new) can
profoundly change the flavor of white wines (see What Oak Does, below). When aged in
wood too long, a white wine loses delicacy and the purity of its fruit, and instead takes on
the brazen flavor of wood and overt vanilla. In anthropomorphic terms, such a wine can
seem like the equivalent of a small-built woman wearing tons of makeup and a huge fur
coat. Conversely, when oak aged with care and restraint, such full-fruit grapes as
chardonnay can acquire greater lushness and complexity.
    Finally, white wine, like red, may be fined or filtered to stabilize and further clarify it.
It is then bottled and, again like red wine, may be given further aging in bottle.
                              WHAT OAK DOES

Without oak, many wines as we know them would not exist. They would not taste the
same, smell the same, or have the same texture or structure. Nor are there good substitutes
for oak. Cherry, walnut, chestnut, pine, and many other woods can all be made into
barrels; none, however, enhances wine the way oak does. Nor has technology devised an
oak alternative. In short, wine and oak—inseparable for the past two millennia of
winemaking—show every sign of remaining married.
   Why is there a special affinity between oak and wine? Oak has the ability to transform
wine, to coax it out of the genre of simple fermented juice and give it depth, length,
volume, and sometimes, more complexity and intensity. Oak wood is composed of several
classes of complex chemical compounds, which leave their mark on virtually every aspect
of a wine’s character. The most noticeable of these are phenols, some of which impart
vanilla-like flavors, notes of tea and tobacco, and impressions of sweetness. One of the
most important classes of phenols are the substances commonly called tannins.
     CHIPS, BEANS, AND BLOCKS—OAK WITHOUT BARRELS
 Consider the cost of a tree grown for two centuries, and the price of barrels made, largely by hand, from
 that pristine wood. Not surprisingly, barrels are time consuming to make and breathtakingly expensive.
 After salaries, they’re often the second biggest yearly expense for a winery. (In 2011, one of the largest
 American wine companies spent a reported $22 million on barrels alone.) Yet, today, barrels are used
 virtually exclusively for fairly expensive wines. For their part, modestly priced wines rarely, if ever, rest
 inside barrels. Enter the brave new world of chips, powders, beans, blocks, and interstaves. Made from
 oak wood that’s unsuitable for barrels, these barrel alternatives, as they are known, are a fraction of the
 cost of barrels (and, of course, the time and labor involved in making them is less). How are they used?
 Oak chips, beans, and blocks are added directly to the fermenting tank—either loose or enclosed in a
 giant mesh teabag. Staves can be inserted into frames that can be dropped into older barrels or
 suspended in stainless steel tanks. Finally, most barrel alternatives come toasted in a variety of ways and
 flavors worthy of a Starbucks menu. Spicy staves, anyone? How about premium dark-roast chips with
 extra vanilla and caramel?
   No matter their range of flavors, barrel alternatives never achieve the subtle, complex effects of
 barrels. And while such alternatives are an asset in the making of inexpensive wines, as of this writing, I
 know of no great wine in the world that is made using them.

   I do want to quickly add that not every wine benefits from time in a barrel. For some
wines—whites in particular—the weighty, sweet vanilla and toasted oak flavors of new
wood can be like a glob of sauce masking the purity of the fruit itself. Moreover, some
wines with oaky flavors haven’t actually spent time in barrels. It’s highly unlikely, for
example, that an $18 chardonnay was fermented in a new French oak barrel that cost
$1,300. The economics just don’t work. To get its oaky character, the chardonnay was
probably made with a “barrel alternative.” For more about this, see Chips, Beans, and
Blocks—Oak Without Barrels, above.
   Although open wooden buckets were used to hold and transport wine more than two
thousand years before the Christian Era, closed oak barrels first came into use during the
Roman Empire. Oak, extremely plentiful in the forests of Europe, had many desirable
qualities: It was strong enough to withstand considerable wear and tear without busting
apart, yet sufficiently malleable to be shaped into barrels that could be rolled and moved.
Moreover, oak barrels were leakproof, despite the fact that nothing was (or is) used
between the staves to seal them.
   Lastly, oak usually had a desirable effect on the wine itself. Early winemakers
discerned that wine grew softer, and in many cases tasted richer and more substantial, after
oak aging. During the last third of the twentieth century, research on oak aging began to
unravel the reason why.
   At least as far as wine is concerned, oak wood is porous to a perfect degree. Both water
and alcohol evaporate outward through the barrel’s staves and bunghole (the small access
hole, closed with a stopper, or bung). A 60-gallon (230 liter) barrel of cabernet sauvignon,
for example, may lose as much as 5 to 6 gallons (19 to 23 liters) of liquid per year—about
thirty bottles of wine. At the same time, minute amounts of oxygen from outside are
seeping through the grain and into the barrel, helping to weave together the elements of
the wine and giving it a softer dimension. Oxygen also becomes a factor in the equation
each time the winemaker removes the bung from the barrel and tops up the wine or
partially clarifies it by racking it into another barrel.
                                          KOSHER WINE
 The word kosher means “fit,” thus, in Jewish tradition, kosher wines are considered fit to drink. There are
 two types—non-mevushal and mevushal.
    Non-mevushal kosher wine must be made, handled, bottled, certified, opened, poured, and drunk only
 by Sabbath-observant Jews. If a non-Jew touches the wine, the wine loses its non-mevushal kosher
 status, is considered unfit for sacramental use, and will be rejected by strict observant Jews, who will not
 drink it. The second, and far more common type of kosher wine is mevushal (literally, “cooked”).
 Mevushal wines are made like non-mevushal wines, with one exception—they are pasteurized and can
 therefore be bought, opened, and shared among Jews and non-Jews, as well as non-observant Jews
 and observant Jews.
    Religious scholars speculate that the reason for the two types goes far back in history. Traditionally, of
 course, Jewish religious authorities knew that wine was used not just for sacramental purposes, but also
 socially. Wine eased and encouraged social interaction. It’s thought that early Jewish intellectuals may
 have feared such socializing, viewing it as the first step toward the disintegration of Jewish culture and
 the assimilation of
   Jews into other cultures. To mitigate against this, two versions of kosher wine would be made.
 Mevushal wine would be, quite literally, boiled, making it in a sense morally sterilized. Although mevushal
 wine would therefore be less palatable than non-mevushal wine, it could be shared by non-Jews and
 non-observant Jews with observant Jews.
    Until recently in the United States, the wines were also produced from foxy-tasting native grapes, such
 as Concord (of jelly fame). Such grapes thrived along the East Coast, where the largest centers of
 Jewish population were to be found. Over time, American-made kosher wine became inextricably linked
 with low-quality, syrupy-sweet wines that tasted like adult Kool-Aid.
    Today kosher wines—non-mevushal and mevushal—are in an entirely different league, and compete
 with fine wines made anywhere in the world. They are made around the world from classic European
 grape varieties, such as cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay. Importantly, mevushal wines are no longer
 boiled, but flash pasteurized—a gentler form of sterilization—and the wine is then aged. According to
 KosherWine.com, a leading kosher wine retail site, as of 2010, annual sales of kosher wine in the United
 States alone had a value of approximately $45 million.

   The impact oak has on wine depends, among other things, on the type of oak used. Of
the approximately three hundred species of oak that grow around the world, just three
main types are used in winemaking: the American oak Quercus alba (mainly from the
Midwest) and the French oaks Quercus robur and Quercus sessiliflora (also called
Quercus petraea).
   The flavor American oak imparts to wine is different from the flavor French oak
imparts. American oak, which is heavier, denser, and less porous than French oak, also
tends to be less tannic and have more pronounced vanilla and sometimes coconut-like
flavors. French oak is more subtle in terms of flavor, somewhat more tannic, and allows
for slightly greater—but still gentle—oxidation. Neither is necessarily better than the
other, in the same way that basil isn’t necessarily better than rosemary. The idea is to find
a type of oak that will best support the fruit flavors in a given wine. To determine this,
winemakers generally age small lots of their wines experimentally in many different oak
barrels representing different oak species, different forests, and a variety of coopers, and
then decide which ones work best.
   The age of the barrels also matters. A wine-maker can choose to put a wine into new
barrels, used barrels, or a combination of new and used barrels. (Note that sometimes used
barrels are euphemistically referred to as seasoned barrels—as in a “seasoned” person.)
New barrels have the strongest impact on a wine’s aroma and flavor (and for that reason,
some winemakers prefer not to use them). Second-use barrels have considerably less
impact, since most things that can be extracted from a barrel are extracted the first time
that barrel is used. After four uses or so, a barrel is generally considered “neutral”—
though it can still be used (for decades) to store and age wine. In a neutral barrel, a small
amount of oxygenation will still occur, but little if any barrel flavor is left to be imparted
to the wine.
    Aging in oak is not the same as fermenting in oak. The two distinctly different
processes have different consequences. Imagine, for example, a batch of chardonnay that
is fermented in oak and then aged in oak for six months. Imagine a second batch that is
fermented in stainless steel and then aged in oak for the same period. Although you might
expect that the wine receiving two doses of oak (during fermentation and aging) would
have the most pronounced oak and vanilla flavors and the strongest impression of tannin,
the opposite is usually true. When a wine is fermented in oak, the yeasts also interact with
the wood. When the spent yeast cells (lees) are ultimately removed from the wine, a
measure of the wood tannin (and wood flavors) may be removed with them. By
comparison, a white wine fermented in stainless steel and then put without the lees into
oak barrels readily absorbs the wood flavors and tannins to which it is exposed.
   So, in the end, in using oak judiciously, a winemaker can opt to: ferment the wine in
oak but not age it in it; age the wine in oak but not ferment it in it; use some of both; or
use none of either.




      The oak forests of France have been carefully maintained by continual replanting since the 13th century.
              MAKING OFF-DRY AND SWEET WINE

As noted in What Makes Wine, Wine? (page 9), there are no internationally agreed-upon
definitions for terms such as off-dry and semisweet. Still, we could probably all recognize
a wine that’s just a touch sweet, in other words, a wine that’s not dessert-level opulent.
   How are these wines—I’ll group them all together under the banner “off-dry”—made?
As you know, during the fermentation of dry wines, yeasts convert the sugar in grapes to
alcohol. However, in making an off-dry wine, fermentation is stopped, usually by giving
the wine a small dose of SO2 (sulfur dioxide), which kills the yeasts before they have
converted all the sugar to alcohol. This leaves a wine with a touch of natural sweetness
and a slightly lower level of alcohol. In this scenario, the wine is not sweet enough to be a
dessert wine; in fact, the tiny bit of residual sugar may be just barely perceptible. Usually,
the goal of leaving this small snippet of sugar is simply to buttress the fruitiness of the
wine. Many rieslings are made in this way.
   So, how does a wine come to be sweet enough to be dessert in itself? The process starts
with grapes that are very high in sugar because they were:
1 PICKED WHEN THEIR    sugar content is very high; or
2 PICKED, LAID OUT   on mats, and allowed to raisinate, thereby concentrating their sugar; or
3 PERMITTED TO FREEZE    on the vine (as in eiswein) so that water can be separated from the
sugary juice; or
4 ATTACKED BY THE  fungus Botrytis cinerea (the “noble rot” of French Sauternes), which
consumes some of the water in the grapes and helps more to evaporate, again
concentrating the sugar.
   Each of these methods is explained in more depth later (the Botrytis cinerea responsible
for Sauternes, for example, is addressed fully in the Bordeaux section, page 157). What’s
important to know here is that all of these options are extremely risky—animals may eat
the sweet grapes, the grapes may be attacked by unfavorable molds or diseases, weather
may destroy the grapes before the crop can be picked, and so on. Moreover, each of these
processes is very labor intensive. Sweet wines, as a result, are almost universally rare and
expensive.
   No matter which of the four methods is used, the resulting grape juice has a higher
sugar content than usual. Before the yeasts can convert all this sugar to alcohol, either the
winemaker stops the fermentation early, as for an off-dry wine, or the yeasts’ action is
halted by the very alcohol they have produced. (As you’ll recall, once the alcohol level has
reached about 16 percent, most yeasts die from “alcohol poisoning,” and whatever natural
sugar is left remains.)
                              CHAPTALIZATION

Many people think sweet wines are made by adding sugar to them, but as you see from the
previous section, that’s not the case. Adding sugar—chaptalization—has a different
purpose. Named after Jean-Antoine Chaptal, minister of agriculture under Napoleon, who
first sanctioned the process, chaptalization is the act of adding sugar to a low-alcohol wine
before and/or during fermentation so the yeasts will have more sugar to convert to alcohol.
Thus, the goal is not to make the wine sweeter—it’s to make it higher in alcohol and
therefore fuller in body.
   Importantly, you cannot taste sugar in the chaptalized wine; the process does not
increase the wine’s sweetness. Critics, however, contend that chaptalized wines take on a
blowsy, out-of-balance character, since the final alcohol has been artificially jacked up.
   Many wines in northern Europe are chaptalized when the grapes do not get ripe enough
to produce a wine with sufficient body. Even though this process is usually illegal, it’s
rather easy—just by accident of course—to spill a huge sack of sugar into the fermenting
vat. Quel domage! Conversely, wines made in such sunny places as Australia and
California are rarely chaptalized because grapes in those places virtually always get ripe
enough to produce more than enough alcohol.
Cabernet sauvignon grapes ripen in the Napa Valley sunshine. Each grape variety is subtly unique in the shape and size
                                   of its berries and clusters, as well as its leaves.
GETTING TO KNOW THE GRAPES

Airén (i-WREN) is a good place to begin. Recognize the name? What about rkatsiteli (are-
cat-si-TELL-ee) or savagnin (sa-va-NYEN)? They are, respectively, one of the most
widely planted grape varieties in the world; the most widely planted grape in the former
Soviet Union (it also grows in the United States, in New York State); and the “mother” of
sauvignon blanc. But you may never have drunk wine made from airén or rkatsiteli or
savagnin.
   There are five thousand to ten thousand varieties of grapes (see Drinking DNA, page
55). Scientists do not have an exact figure because many varieties are thought to exist
solely in laboratory collections, and are no longer cultivated. Of this large number, about
150 are planted in commercially significant amounts. I’ve chosen twenty-five of those—
the ones I think we are most likely to encounter—and have included here a profile of each.
You’ll find them on the following pages, followed by a glossary of virtually every other
important grape worldwide.
   One last note: I have tried, when it seemed appropriate (or just plain fascinating), to
include information on the parents or genetic relationships of the grapes in this chapter.
Hundreds of today’s grapes are, in fact, natural crosses (that is, they spontaneously
occurred in nature) of other grapes, and hundreds more are intentional crosses (made by
growers or scientists). My leading resource for this information has been the authoritative
and quite phenomenal reference work Wine Grapes by Jancis Robinson, Julia Harding,
and Dr. José Vouillamoz (2012).
        THE TOP TWENTY-FIVE GRAPES TO KNOW

ALBARIÑO
One of the liveliest white wines in Europe and considered one of the best wines for
seafood, albariño (al-bar-EEN-yo) comes from the region of Rías Baixas (REE-az BUY-
shaz), along northeastern Spain’s ruggedly beautiful and very green northwestern coast (it
looks like Ireland). In the past decade, albariño has become Spain’s most notable and
delicious dry white table wine, even though the dry whites of Rioja (made from the grape
variety viura) were once better known. Albariño is floral and citrusy, but not quite as
aromatic as, say, riesling or gewürztraminer. It is rarely made or aged in oak and is best
when young and snappy. Interestingly, unlike most Spanish (or European) wines, which
are named for the place from which they come, albariño is always labeled just that—
albariño. (See also Rías Baixas, page 485). Albariño, for all its fame in Spain, probably
originated in northeastern Portugal, where it has grown for centuries and where it is
known as alvarinho. It is still grown widely there and is the core grape in vinho verde.

BARBERA
Barbera (bar-BEAR-a), the most widely planted red grape in the northwestern Italian
region of Piedmont, rose to prominence there after the phylloxera epidemic (page 30).
Genetic research suggests it probably originated someplace else and was brought to
Piedmont. Its parents are not known.
    Even though nebbiolo (the grape used to make Barolo and Barbaresco) is more
renowned, it’s barbera, not nebbiolo, that Piedmontese winemakers invariably drink with
dinner. Beginning in the mid 1980s, the quality of barbera rose dramatically. By planting it
in better sites, limiting the yield, and aging the wine in better barrels, Piedmontese wine-
makers began making superbly mouthfilling, rich wines packed with flavor. Top barberas
also have a natural vivacity—a precision and vibrancy that comes from the grapes’
relatively high acidity. Today, all of the great barberas come from Piedmont, and the grape
is rarely planted elsewhere, although there is a small amount grown in northern California.
A century ago, Italian immigrants in California planted it in poor, usually hot areas,
hoping to make a hearty, low-cost red wine. After a brief resurgence as part of the “Cal-
Ital” movement of the early 1990s, barbera sadly began to decline in importance there.

CABERNET FRANC
While not as well known as its offspring, cabernet sauvignon and merlot, cabernet franc
(CAB-er-nay FRONK) plays an important role in many of the world’s top Bordeaux and
Bordeaux-style blends. Indeed, on the so-called “Right Bank” of Bordeaux, in the
appellations Pomerol and St.-Émilion, cabernet franc can make up 50 percent of the blend
or more as is often the case with the legendary Bordeaux wine Château Cheval Blanc.
   Compared to its Bordeaux confreres, cabernet franc is generally not as fleshy as merlot,
nor is it as structured and intense as cabernet sauvignon. For many wineries, it thus sits in
perfect mid-prance between the two. If it gets ripe, that is. When the grapes are unripe
(and it’s a challenge to ripen cabernet franc), the wine has a distinct green bell pepper
character—the result of compounds in the wine known as pyrazines. But in warmer years,
when sugars are high and pyrazines fall, cabernet franc can be fantastic, with its violet or
irislike aromas and minerally, dark chocolaty flavors. Loire Valley Chinon (100 percent
cabernet franc) is the most well-known, delicious example. But the grape has also made
quiet but stunning progress in California, as wines like Vineyard 29’s cabernet franc attest.
   Most French grape varieties came from the east: France got its initial vines from Italy,
which in turn got them via Lebanon (historically, Phoenicia), which probably got them
from southern Turkey. But surprising genetic research in the 2010s revealed that cabernet
franc originated to the southwest of France, in Spain’s Basque country, and from there was
brought northeast to Bordeaux.




The highest quality wines come from clusters of grapes that are sometimes painstakingly destemmed by hand. Only the
                       most perfect grapes will be picked off the cluster; the rest are discarded.
                                            DRINKING DNA
 Throughout the entire history of winemaking—and indeed right up until the early 1990s—the only way to
 try to tell, say, merlot from mourvèdre was by ampelography, the science of identifying vines by
 measuring and characterizing their shoots, canes, leaves, buds, flowers, clusters, seeds, and grapes.
 Not surprisingly, farmers sometimes got it wrong, growing renowned “pinot blanc” that turned out to be
 chardonnay, and so on.
    Since the early 1990s, however, grapevine identification has had quite a bit in common with, say, an
 FBI forensic laboratory. Just as DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid, the chemical composition of genes)
 obtained from a crime scene can be compared with the DNA of a suspect, so the DNA of a grape variety
 being researched can be compared to the DNA of known varieties. Scientists, using complex techniques,
 attempt to find genetic messages encoded in certain sequences of the grape variety’s DNA. These then
 become the identification markers for any individual variety.
     In groundbreaking research in 1997, such DNA typing was also used for the first time to reveal the
 parentage of grapes. According to top genetic researchers such as Dr. José Vouillamoz, author, with
 Jancis Robinson and Julia Harding, of Wine Grapes, the most authoritative reference work on vine
 genetics, a small number of grape varieties have given birth to all of the varieties in the world today. Chief
 among these “founder varieties” are pinot noir, gouais blanc, and savagnin (also known as traminer). The
 first two together have begotten more than twenty different varieties over time, including chardonnay and
 gamay. For its part, the Casanova-like gouais blanc has crossed with scores of varieties (some of which
 no longer exist), resulting in the creation of more than eighty different varieties, including riesling,
 blaufränkisch, and muscadelle, to name three very different progeny. The idea that all of the important
 varieties—red and white—can be traced back to perhaps fewer than ten founder varieties, and a few
 primary domestication sites (some of which are probably in modern-day Turkey) is startlingly new.
    Finally, the very first original varieties that gave rise to the founder varieties were probably all red. It’s
 thought that the first white variety was a mutation that occurred when pieces of DNA moved within the
 gene, interrupting the coding for anthocyanins, molecules that create color. In early wine-drinking
 civilizations, the rarity of white wines gave them social value and led to the perception that white wines
 were more refined than reds, and as such, more desirable as upper-class drinks.




                      Ripe cabernet franc grapes, amazingly formed in a heart-shaped cluster.


CABERNET SAUVIGNON
The preeminent classic red grape variety, cabernet sauvignon (CAB-er-nay sew-vin-
YAWN) is capable of making some of the most structured, complex, majestic, and
ageworthy reds in the world. It’s astounding that a wine so often angular and powerful
when young can meta-morphose into a velvety, rich, elegant, and complex wine with
several years’ aging. Cabernet can be like the awkward kid who grows up to be a Nobel
laureate, and sexy to boot. Not all cabernet sauvignons have this ability, of course. Many
modestly priced cabernets are made in an easy-drinking style that is simply simple. These
wines bear little of the depth, power, and intense concentration of, say, Château Latour
from Bordeaux, Sassicaia from Italy, or Harlan Estate from the Napa Valley.
   But there’s something else that makes great cabernets like these so compelling. Few
other red wines in the world have cabernet’s counterintuitive ability to combine two of the
characteristics mentioned above—power and elegance. I think it’s this capacity to embody,
in one split second, two contrapuntal ideas that makes the great cabernets so intellectually
fascinating… a yin-yang of flavor.

                HOW MUCH CABERNET IN THE CABERNET?
    Labeling a wine based on the variety of grape used to make the wine has been commonplace in the New
    World since the late 1960s. (In Europe, wines are far more commonly labeled according to the place where
    the grapes were grown.) In the United States, the first varietally labeled wines were required by federal law
    to be composed of 51 percent of the variety named. In 1983, the minimum was raised to the current level of
    75 percent. Specific appellations can choose to exceed (but not lessen) the federal regulations (for example,
    in the Willamette Valley of Oregon, all pinot noirs with that grape name on the front label must be at least 90
    percent pinot noir).

   Cabernet sauvignon’s aromas and flavors are well known and easy to indentify:
blackberry, black currant, cassis, mint, cedar, graphite, licorice, leather, green tobacco,
cigar, black plums, dark chocolate, sandalwood, and so on. These sensations are then
swirled into a delicious amalgam as the wine ages. I should add that unripe, poorly made
cabernet sauvignon, like poorly made sauvignon blanc, usually tastes vegetal—a dank
mixture of bell peppers, canned green beans, and cabbage water. This shared tendency
toward vegetative green flavors if the grapes are not ripe comes as no surprise, since
cabernet sauvignon is the offspring of sauvignon blanc (which, one day, thought to be in
the mid-1700s, had a nice moment in nature with cabernet franc, resulting in cabernet
sauvignon). Both cabernet sauvignon and sauvignon blanc are high in pyrazines—
compounds in grape skins that give the final wine a bell pepper flavor.
   Because cabernet sauvignon is one of the most tannic of all the major red grapes, it has,
over the past few decades, been a prime focus in the study of tannin and tannin ripeness.
Twenty five years ago, for example, it was commonly thought that cabernet required
decades of aging to feel soft. Today, many cabernet sauvignons packed with large amounts
of tannin nonetheless possess a soft mouthfeel right off the bat. This is possible because
harvest decisions are now often based on the physiological maturity of the tannin in
cabernet grapes, rather than sugar (see the tannin section in What Makes Wine, Wine?,
page 12). So, even though it may seem like a public relations pitch: It is indeed possible
for the best cabernet sauvignons today to be ready to drink now and delicious decades in
the future.
   Finally, historically, the world’s most prized cabernet sauvignons were cabernets
blended with merlot, cabernet franc, and perhaps malbec and petite verdot. They came
from the Médoc communes of Margaux, St.-Julien, Pauillac, and St.-Estèphe in Bordeaux,
where the wines were (and still are) ranked into “growths,” from First Growth, the most
renowned, down to Fifth Growth. However, world-class cabernets are now regularly being
made in California (especially the Napa Valley), Italy, Australia, and Washington State.

                THE MYTH OF CABERNET AND CHOCOLATE
    It may sound romantic—even inspired—but as marriages go, cabernet and chocolate are a match made in
    hell (or in the depths of the marketing department). Chocolate is an extremely powerful, profound, and
    complex flavor. Its deep bitterness accentuates the tannin in cabernet sauvignon, making the wine taste
    severe and angular. Chocolate’s rich fruitiness blows away cabernet’s graceful fruity nuances, making the
    wine taste drab and hollow. Moreover, chocolate’s profound sweetness makes most dry wines taste sour. In
    short, the would-be dominatrix chocolate needs a partner more powerful and sweeter than herself. Which
    may be one of the reasons sweet, luscious, opulent Port is a life necessity.


CHARDONNAY
To any wine drinker, it comes as no surprise that, for several decades, chardonnay
(shardoe-NAY) has been one of the most successful white wines in the world. The wine’s
easily understood, appealing flavors—vanilla, butter, butterscotch, buttered toast, custard,
minerals, green apples, exotic citrus fruits—are matched by equally effusive textures—
creamy, lush, and full-bodied. (It’s the Marilyn Monroe of white grapes, to be sure.) We
are talking here about the majority of chardonnays in the world; of course, lean, racy,
lightning-crisp Chablis (100 percent chardonnay) remains a brilliant sensorial exception to
the norm.
   But chardonnay’s popularity is, indeed, relatively recent. Wine drinkers are often
surprised to learn that, as of the mid-1960s, there were but a few hundred acres of it in all
of California (by 2011, there were 95,000 acres/38,445 hectares!). Ditto for most of the
rest of the world. Little, if any, chardonnay existed in Chile, Argentina, Australia, South
Africa, Spain, or Italy, not to mention Oregon, Washington State, and other parts of the
United States. In fact, the only places chardonnay reigned were its homeland, the small
Burgundy region of France, and Burgundy’s northern neighbor, Champagne. (See
Burgundy, page 197.) It was in Burgundy, probably sometime in the early Middle Ages,
that chardonnay arose as a seedling—a natural cross of the white grape gouais blanc with
the red grape pinot noir.
   Small as it was in terms of production, Burgundian chardonnay proved prodigious in its
ability to inspire winemakers worldwide. Today, chardonnay is virtually ubiquitous.
(Although I think it’s fair to say that few wines among the millions of cases now produced
ever manage to hold a candle to the best Burgundian versions.)
   Stylistically, chardonnay is often said to be a “winemaker’s wine”—meaning that wine-
makers like it for its capacity to be transformed by lots of winemaking techniques. Barrel
fermentation, malolactic fermentation, sur lie aging, and so on—chardonnay often gets the
whole nine yards of technical possibility. Of course, there’s a hitch. Today, too much char-
donnay tastes manipulated, diffused, flabby, overoaked, and overdone. In a sea of these
sad behemoths, however, the finest chardonnays remain among the world’s most luscious
and complex dry white wines.
                                IT’S ALL ABOUT SPECIES
         All grapevines belong to the genus Vitis (VIT-tis). Sometime in the late Tertiary Period,
         66 million to 2.58 million years ago, climatic changes caused the genus to split into
         about sixty separate species. The most important species for wine drinkers is vinifera
         (vin-IF-er-a). Today 99.99 percent of the wines in the world are made from grapes
         belonging to Vitis vinifera. Interestingly, this was and is the only species native to
         Europe and Asia. Chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, merlot, pinot noir, riesling,
         sauvignon blanc, and zinfandel, for example, are all Vitis vinifera grapes. The other
         dozens of species were and are all native to North America. Among these, the best
         known among wine drinkers is Vitis labrusca, native to New England and Canada.
         Concord belongs to this species. It was probably Vitis labrusca vines that inspired Leif
         Eriksson to name North America Vinland in 1001. Wines (not to mention jelly and jam)
         are still made from this species, especially in upper New York State.


CHENIN BLANC
The most famous, vibrant chenin blancs (SHEN-in BLAHNK) of the world come from the
Loire Valley of France, specifically from the appellations Vouvray and Savennières. The
Loire Valley is also the ancestral home of this grape, which arose as a natural cross of
savagnin and an unknown parent.
   The best examples of chenin blanc are stunningly complex wines with a flavor of
apples and honey (although not necessarily honey’s sweetness). They are shimmering with
acidity, minerally, and long-lived. If modern life allowed for such seemingly lost pleasures
as sitting in a meadow reading Madame Bovary or The Age of Innocence, chenin blanc
would be the fitting wine to drink.
    Loire Valley chenin blanc is made in a variety of degrees of sweetness, from bone-dry
to just a touch of sweetness (to balance the wine’s dramatic acidity) to fully sweet. The
latter can make for phenomenal dessert wines, as evidenced by the most legendary and
luscious of all, Quarts de Chaume, from a tiny area in the middle of the Loire Valley.
   Chenin blanc is also a well-known white grape in South Africa, where it is sometimes
known as steen. There, however, it is unfortunately made mostly into a simple, innocuous
quaffing wine. In California, chenin blanc was a major white grape prior to the 1960s.
Today, most California chenin blanc grapes are over-cropped for high yields and are
destined for jug wines, a sad fate given the grapes’ potential character.

GAMAY
Gamay (gam-AY), or more properly gamay noir, is the source of the French wine
Beaujolais (including Beaujolais Nouveau), oceans of which are washed down in Parisian
bistros every year. Of all the well-known red grapes, gamay is perhaps the lowest in tannin
and thus, structurally speaking, more like a white wine than a red. It’s also exuberantly
fruity. In the hands of a great producer, and from grapes grown on a great site, this
fruitiness spirals around flavors that exude a sense of crushed rock and minerals, and the
total flavor effect can be dazzling. (Alas, gamay from a mediocre site, grown at high
yields, and then made in a commercial style, is fruitiness that’s back-fired. Indeed, cheap
commercial gamays are dead ringers for melted black cherry Jell-O and bubble gum.) The
most serious, best gamays in the world are from small producers in one of the ten “cru”
villages within the Beaujolais region. See the Beaujolais section (page 227) for more on
these.
   Gamay noir’s parents are pinot noir and gouais blanc, making it a sibling of many
grapes, including chardonnay, Auxerrois, and melon de Bourgogne. It has existed in its
homeland, Burgundy, France, since the fourteenth century. Late in that century, however, it
was banned by one of the powerful dukes of Burgundy, and banished to the Beaujolais
region, south of Burgundy proper.
   Several decades ago, so-called gamay (probably actually the French grape valdiguié, or
sometimes an undistinguished clone of pinot noir) was commonly grown in California to
be used in jug wines. Today, however, outside France, gamay is virtually nonexistent as a
varietal wine.




                Though they make white wine, gewürztraminer grapes are deep pink in color.


GEWÜRZTRAMINER
More than almost any other wine we might regularly encounter, gewürztraminer’s (guh-
VURZ-tra-meen-er) nose is heady (sorry, couldn’t resist). In fact, the explosive aromas of
gewürztraminer—roses, lychees, gingerbread, orange marmalade, grapefruit pith, fruit-
cocktail syrup—come vaulting out of the glass. Gewürztraminer is nothing if not
extroverted. Even novice drinkers easily recognize it.
   The prefix gewürz- means spice in German, although the meaning is more along the
lines of “outrageously perfumed” than anything that might come out of a kitchen spice
rack. The grape is not actually a distinct variety, but rather savagnin rosé—a pink-berried,
highly aromatic clone of savagnin, one of the so-called “founder varieties.” (Traminer
aromatico, a specialty of the northern Italian province of Trentino-Alto Adige, is another
clone of savagnin.)
   It’s important to note that gewürztraminer’s pungent aromatics and massive fruitiness
can be confusing, leading you to think that the wine you’re drinking is sweet. That’s
usually not the case (the telltale edge of bitterness at the finish is evidence). Indeed, the
world’s best gewürztraminers are decidedly dry (unless, of course, the wine in question is
specifically a dessert wine made from this grape).




  In very warm years, grapes of all types can shrivel and dessicate. Most “raisined” bunches will be sorted out and
         removed, though a small percentage can contribute extra sweetness, leading to a fuller-bodied wine.

   The most intense and breathtaking gewürztraminers are made in France, in the
northeastern region of Alsace. Here the wine is legendary—deeply yellow with a coppery
cast, superbly concentrated, exquisitely balanced, full-bodied, full of extract, with just
enough acidity to hold it all together, and a mega-mouthful of flavor. (Because the wine
tends to be naturally low in acidity, poor-quality examples can come off oily.) No surprise
that top gewürztraminer is usually drunk with rich, complex pork dishes.
   Outside of Alsace, there’s only one place in the world where gewürztraminer is reliably
sensational: the region of Trentino-Alto Adige in Italy.

GRENACHE
Grenache (gren-AHSH) is well known both as a white grape (grenache blanc) and a red
(grenache noir). The red grenache noir is especially valued and makes a slew of stunning
wines around the world. It is, for example, the lead grape in many southern French wines,
including Châteauneuf-du-Pape, Côtes-du-Rhône, and Gigondas, as well as the top grape
in many northern regions of Spain, including Campo de Borja and Priorat. And, when the
vines are old, grenache makes devastatingly great wine in Australia. In California and
Washington State, the grape continues to inspire many avant-garde winemakers, and there
are now remarkable examples of grenache and grenache blends in both states.
   Although France is often thought of as grenache’s ancestral home, the grape is Spanish
in origin and rightfully ought to be known by its Spanish name, garnacha (gar-NA-cha).
While garnacha’s parents are not known, it is thought to have arisen in Aragon, one of the
seventeen autonomous communities in Spain.
    That said, until recently, a strong scientific hypothesis had grenache originating in Italy,
first as a white grape called vernaccia (later the pronounciation was corrupted to garnaccia
or garnacha) and later brought to Spain (where it mutated to form a red clone) and from
there to France. But as similar sounding as the names vernaccia and garnacha are,
molecular analyses show no genetic relationship between the two grapes. The Italian
connection is not without merit, however, since DNA typing shows Sardinia’s important
grape cannonau to be garnacha tinta/grenache noir.
   Like pinot noir, grenache is genetically unstable, is difficult to grow, and challenging to
make into wine. From less than ideal vineyards, grenache noir can be heavy-handed,
simple, and fairly alcoholic (there are countless examples of this in central and southern
Spain, southern France, and the Central Valley of California). But when grenache is at its
best, the wines that result have an unmistakable purity, richness, and beauty, plus the
evocative aroma and flavor of cherry preserves. Grenache is not particularly high in
tannin, and thus great examples have a sappy, luxurious texture.
   In most places where it is grown, grenache is blended with other varieties—carignan,
syrah, and mourvèdre in particular.

GRÜNER VELTLINER
A decade ago, grüner veltliner (GREW-ner VELT-leaner) would not have made a top-25
list like this. But its place today is a testament to the quality of the variety and the surging
success of Austrian wine. Grüner veltliner is, in fact, the leading white wine of Austria—
more acres are planted with it than with any other variety. It’s also the vinous signature of
the country; the grape especially excels in the pristine vineyards along the flowing Danube
river north and west of Vienna. With the exception of the Czech Republic, Hungary, and a
few other, smaller areas in Eastern Europe, grüner veltliner is grown virtually no place
else.
   The grape is an ancient natural cross of savagnin and a nearly extinct German variety,
St. Georgener. Going back even further in the family tree, grüner veltliner is related to
pinot noir (possibly as a grandchild), since pinot noir and savagnin are related.
   Grüner veltliner has a forward personality. Precise, lively, bold, dry, and minerally, it’s
legendary for its lightening-strike of white pepper aroma and flavor, along with a subtle
hint of green legumes. Like riesling, grüner is virtually never blended with other grapes
and is made in a purist manner, which almost never involves new oak. Also like riesling,
the grape tends to be high in natural acidity, giving it a mouthwatering quality, as well as
considerable advantages when it comes to pairing with food.
                As autumn approaches, a swallow has found a perfect spot to make her nest.


MALBEC
Indigenous to southwestern France, malbec (MAL-beck), the now-popular name for the
grape variety cot, is the offspring of two obscure French grapes—magdeleine noire des
Charentes and prunelard. While malbec is one of the five main red grapes that can be
blended to make red Bordeaux, plantings of it there have been declining for a long time
(the grape is prone to frost, and thus has steadily fallen out of favor in Bordeaux’s
maritime climate). Today, malbec generally makes up less than 10 percent of any
Bordeaux wine—if it’s used at all.
   Half a world away, however, malbec is a star. In the mid-nineteenth century, the grape
was brought from Bordeaux to Argentina, where it is now the leading grape for fine red
wines. There, it is grown in the dry, sunny, extremely high-altitude vineyards that, like
steps, descend from the peaks of the Andes. And, in contrast to Bordeaux, malbec in
Argentina (pronounced, in that country, mal-BEC) is almost always made as a varietal
wine, rather than part of a blend.
   Malbec tends to be low in acidity and slightly less tannic than cabernet sauvignon.
Indeed, it’s prized for its soft, mouthfilling texture (the wine equivalent of molten
chocolate cake), its deep, inky color, and its plummy, mocha, earthy aromas and flavors.
   Outside of Argentina and Bordeaux, malbec is the historic grape of Cahors, in
southwestern France, where it has traditionally been known by its original name, cot. (In
an interesting marketing twist, Cahors now refers to its wine as the “French malbec,”
although in Cahors the grape makes a rough-edged, tannic wine.)
   Malbec shows good promise in the Napa Valley of California, where it is increasingly
grown to be used as part of top-notch cabernet blends.
                                              MUSKRAT LOVE
 The place:
 My wine classroom in the Napa Valley.
 The scene:
 An exchange with a middle-aged CEO from abroad, during a class on and tasting of California
 chardonnays.
 The dialogue:
 HIM: Number three chardonnay is, umm… a little musky.
 ME, hoping he’s referring to muscat grapes: You mean like muscat blanc or moscato?
 HIM: No. Not moscato. Musky.
 ME: As in, ahem, the testicles of a male deer?
 HIM: I think it’s the ducts in their legs.
    Alas, we were both wrong on the anatomy. The word musk, probably originally derived from the
 Sanskrit mushká (“scrotum”), refers to a strong-smelling substance secreted in a glandular sac under the
 skin of the abdomen of the male musk deer, or a similar secretion of civets, otters, and muskrats.
 Interestingly, despite the word’s rather sobering definition, the term musky is most often used to describe
 fruity, feminine wines with aromatic allure.


MERLOT
Very similar in flavor and texture to cabernet sauvignon, merlot (mehr-LOW) is easily
confused with it in blind tastings. Indeed, the two share the same father—cabernet franc.
But merlot’s mother is the grape magdeleine noire des Charentes, while cabernet’s mother
is sauvignon blanc.
   In the regional French dialect of Bordeaux, the name merlot means “little blackbird”
(after the blackbirds—spelled “merlau”—who reportedly love to eat the grapes). Merlot’s
aromas and flavors include blackberry, cassis, baked cherries, plums, licorice, dark
chocolate, and mocha. What merlot usually lacks is cabernet sauvignon’s occasional hint
of green tobacco or dried mint.
   Much is made of merlot’s relative roundness, plumpness, and lack of tannin compared
to cabernet sauvignon. I think the idea is largely misleading. When merlot is planted in
rocky, well-drained soils in top appellations, it can be every bit as structured,
commanding, complex, and tannic as cabernet sauvignon. The problem is that too often
wine drinkers buy fairly innocuous, inexpensive merlot (sure it’s soft; maybe limp would
be a better word), then compare it with expensive cabernet sauvignon from a top site.
That’s apples to oranges.
    As for cabernet sauvignon, the most famous region for merlot has historically been the
Bordeaux region of France, where merlot (not cabernet sauvignon) is the leading grape in
terms of total production. Merlot in Bordeaux is planted mostly outside of the Médoc, and
is especially renowned on the Right Bank—in the appellations of Pomerol and St.-
Émilion. Here, merlot, too, is almost always blended with cabernet sauvignon, cabernet
franc, and possibly malbec and/or petit verdot. There is one extremely famous exception
to the blending notion—Château Pétrus (from Pomerol), one of the most expensive wines
in the world, is 99 percent merlot.




                         Merlot grapes growing in an unexpected place: Austria.

   In addition to rich, complex, structured merlots from top regions, another compelling
style of merlot also exists: I’ll call it the sleek style. Northern Italy has many such merlots,
as does Long Island, in New York State. But some of the best in this style come from two
places: Chile and Washington State. The sheer number of exciting, deeply concentrated
merlots coming from Washington State is astounding, and is growing larger year after
year. In Chile, merlots like Casa Lapostolle’s Cuvée Alexandre show the riveting potential
this grape has in the New World.

MOURVÈDRE
If you were ever an English major, you’ll know what I mean by this: Mourvèdre (moor-
VED-rah) is the Heathcliff of red grapes. Its dark, hard-edged, almost brooding flavors are
never light, juicy, or lively. Mourvèdre has gravitas.
   Like carignan and grenache, the grape is Spanish in origin. It should properly be known
by its Spanish name, monastrell (or mataró, as it’s called in northern Spain and in the
Pyrenees). Today, it is grown in numerous provinces in the south-central region of
Castilla-La Mancha (especially in the denomination of Jumilla), where it’s used to make
delicious, sometimes muscular wines with dry, bitter espresso-like flavors (red meat is
helpful when consuming them).
   The variety is thought to have originated next door to Castilla-La Mancha, in the
province of Valencia, where it was propagated by monks. The name derives from the Latin
monasteriellu, a diminutive of monasteriu, meaning “monastery.”
   In southern France, a small amount of mourvèdre is often used to give depth, color, and
kick to Rhône blends such as Châteauneuf-du-Pape and Côtes-du-Rhône. Indeed, before
the phylloxera epidemic, mourvèdre was widely planted throughout the south and was the
main red grape in Provence. Today, only the small Provençal appellation of Bandol
remains steadfast mourvèdre territory.
   Mourvèdre was first brought to California from Spain in the mid-1800s, and sparse
plots of old-vine “mataro” can still be found. The grape became popular once again in the
1980s as a blending grape in California’s Rhône-style blends.

MUSCAT
No matter what anyone says, I doubt Eve was tempted by an apple in the Garden of Eden.
A cataclysm of original sin… all for a plain apple? It makes no sense. Some muscat
(MUScat) grapes, on the other hand, could have done it. Intensely aromatic and
awesomely delicious, muscat is irresistible. If every luscious, ripe fruit in the world were
compressed into one phantasmagoric flavor, it would come close to evoking muscat.
   Or muscats to be more precise. For, muscat is not a single variety, but rather, a large
group of different ancient grapes that have grown around the Mediterranean for centuries.
Many scientists and anthrobiologists, in fact, think that some form of muscat may have
been the first domesticated variety of grape.
   What most of these muscats share is the distinct, awesomely fruity muscat aroma. But
that’s where the easy part stops, for there are hundreds of named muscat-something-or-
others. To take but one example, muscat of Alexandria alone is known by approximately
two hundred different names around the Mediterranean.
   Some of the varieties in the muscat group are genetically related, but not all. The two
main muscats that gave rise to numerous progenitors are muscat blanc à petits grains, a
high-quality, small-berried variety, and its daughter, the aforementioned muscat of
Alexandria.
   Within the muscat group are varieties that can be and are made in virtually every style
imaginable: dry, sweet, still, sparkling, and fortified. In Alsace, France, and in Austria,
they are made into fantastic dry still wines (and are often served with asparagus). In
southern Italy and Spain, various muscats are dried on mats (passito) then made into
dessert wines.
   In northern Italy, muscat blanc à petits grains is made into the sweet bubbly wine
almost everyone has had at some time in their lives (moscato d’Asti). In parts of southern
France, the same grape is made into a fortified sweet wine: muscat de Beaumes-de-Venise.
And the list goes on.
  Today, some type of muscat is grown virtually everywhere in the world—from Cyprus,
South Africa, and Slovenia to Israel, Oregon, and Greece.

NEBBIOLO
One of the oldest and most important varieties in Piedmont, Italy, nibiol was first
mentioned in Piedmontese documents in the early thirteenth century. Its parents are
presumed extinct, but its origin does appear to be either Piedmont, or perhaps the
Valtellina region of Lombardy, next door.
   Massively structured and adamantly tannic when young, nebbiolo (neb-ee-OH-low)
from anything less than a fantastic vineyard can simply slam your palate closed and cause
your taste buds to shrink away. The finest nebbiolos, however, possess a combination of
complexity and power that’s unequaled. Those wines come only from certain spots within
the province of Piedmont, in northwestern Italy. Nebbiolo, alas, is the poster child for
grapes that don’t travel well. (Outside of Piedmont, there is only one place that has shown
even modest success with this difficult grape, and it’s a place that’s not on many people’s
wine radar: the Guadalupe Valley of Mexico.)
   In the minds of Italians, nebbiolo is, in status and kingly reputation, equal to the great
cabernet sauvignons of France. The grape makes the exalted Piedmontese wines Barolo
and Barbaresco. Of course, expensive Barolo and Barbaresco are never better than when
served with Piedmont’s other jaw-droppingly expensive specialty: white truffles.
   The word nebbiolo derives from nebbia, fog, a reference to the thick, whitish bloom of
yeasts that forms on the grapes when they are ripe (although many say the name may also
refer to the wisps of fog that envelop the Piedmontese hills in late fall, when the grapes are
picked). The wine has very particular flavors and aromas reminiscent of tar, violets, and
often a rich, espresso-like bitterness from the wine’s pronounced tannin.




At Ata Rangi estate in Martinborough, New Zealand, wildflowers grow as part of the cover crop between rows of vines.
               The flowers draw up moisture from the soil, making sure the vines don’t have “wet feet.”

   Lastly, until relatively recently, it was an unwritten but adamant rule within the wine
world that all great nebbiolos needed to be aged a decade or more before they could be
consumed (never mind enjoyed). Modern winemaking techniques (see the Piedmont
section, page 331) have changed that, and while the great Barolos and Barbarescos remain
utterly long-lived wines, they are also, when young, more delicious than ever.

PINOT GRIS
Depending on where it is grown, pinot gris (PEE-no GREE)—“gray” pinot—can taste
strikingly different. Ironically, the best-known pinot gris—Italian pinot grigio—is
unquestionably usually the lowest in quality. It’s often utterly neutral stuff—serviceable
but not significant; the wine version of a white T-shirt. Of course, there’s no shame in
making basic wine. The crime is in charging a lot for it. (Hello, Santa Margherita.) As
always with wine, there are some delicious exceptions. I’ve always loved the purity and
freshness of the pinot grigios from Jermann (Friuli) and Alois Lageder (Alto Adige), for
example.
   Then there are the pinot gris from Alsace, France—as opposite of pinot grigios as a
wine could be and still be from the same grape. The best Alsace pinot gris is complex,
opulent, often a bit smoky and spicy, but still precise and crisp. It’s considered one of the
four so-called “noble” varieties of Alsace, and is often the perfect wine if you don’t want
something as aromatic as riesling or gewürztraminer. In Germany, pinot gris (called
grauburgunder) can be something else again—broad, even Rubenesque by German wine
standards.
   In Oregon, where pinot gris began to be planted in the 1990s, the best wines are very
tasty, with pear and spice-cake flavors. As for California pinot gris (some of which are
called pinot grigio), most are crisp, fresh wines, sometimes with an intriguing edge of
pepperiness or arugula-like bitterness. But undoubtedly, the most dependably delicious
pinot gris in North America are made in Canada—in the cold, sunny, dry, northern-latitude
Oakanagan Valley of British Columbia.
   Although I have included it here because of its global popularity, pinot gris is not,
technically speaking, its own variety. Like pinot blanc, pinot gris is a clone of pinot noir
that includes a color mutation. As such, in the vineyard, pinot gris grapes can be any color
from bluish silver to mauve-pink to ashen yellow. As a result, this white wine varies in
color, too, although subtly.

                                                GRIS AREA
    Pinot gris is not the same as vin gris. The French term vin gris (literally, “gray wine”) refers to any number
    of slightly pinkish-tinted white wines made from red grapes. Vins gris are usually not as deeply colored as
    rosé or blush wines. While there are dozens of pinot gris made in the United States, there are only a few vins
    gris.


PINOT NOIR
Thought to be more than two thousand years old, pinot noir (along with savagnin and
gouais blanc) is considered one of the “founder varieties”—the great great grandparent of
scores of other well-known grapes, from chardonnay and gamay to corvina and garganega.
It is also, according to geneticist Dr. José Vouillamoz, the likely grandparent of syrah.
While the parents and exact origin of pinot noir (PEE-no NWAHR) itself are not known,
the grape is thought to have come into existence in northeastern France. The name, by the
way, is generally thought to derive from pin, meaning pine, because the small clusters
resemble a pine cone.
   By virtue of its old age and its genetic instability, pinot noir has also begotten hundreds
of clones of itself. The most well known is undoubtedly pinot meunier, the so-called third
variety grown in Champagne, France, but actually a clone of pinot noir that ripens earlier
(an asset in a cold region) and exhibits more fruity flavors. Two other main clones are
color mutations: pinot blanc and pinot gris (pinot grigio).
   If a computer search were conducted on the words and phrases used to describe pinot
noir, this detail would emerge: More than any other wine, pinot is described in sensual
terms. Pinot noir’s association with sensuality derives from the remarkably supple, silky
textures and erotically earthy aromas that great pinot noirs display. Aromatically and in
terms of flavor, the best pinots can exude not only fruit flavors—warm baked cherries,
plums, rhubarb, pomegranate, strawberry jam—but also the sense of damp earth and
rotting leaves (the French call this sous bois, or forest floor), plus mushrooms, worn
leather, and what’s sometimes in Europe called animali—a highly attractive male sweaty
smell (like the smell of a man who has run one mile; I personally find that five miles is a
whole different situation). An old friend of mine who, for many years, was the winemaker
of California’s famous Etude pinot noir, used to say that great pinot noir always possesses
a “hint of corruption.”

       If a computer search were conducted on the words and phrases used to
       describe pinot noir, this detail would emerge: More than any other wine, pinot
       is described in sensual terms.




 Clos de Tart, one of the greatest pinot noirs, comes from the very small Burgundian Grand Cru vineyard Clos de Tart.
                                         The estate was founded in 1141 by nuns.

   Pinot noir is lighter in body and far less tannic than cabernet sauvignon, merlot, or
syrah. It is lighter in color, too, leading beginning wine drinkers to assume that pinot
noir’s flavors are feeble. For the great pinots, just the reverse is true. Although they are
often frail in color, their aromas and flavors can be deep and riveting.
   Of all the well-known grapes, pinot noir is considered the most difficult to grow and
make into wine. For example, pinot noir is highly sensitive to climate changes and
variations in soil composition, and it oxidizes easily during winemaking. This makes pinot
noir a riskier (and more expensive) proposition for the winegrower, the winemaker, and
the wine drinker than, say, cabernet sauvignon. But it’s precisely this enological gamble
that often makes pinot noir all the more fascinating and irresistible.
   The region of Burgundy, in France, where all the red wines (except Beaujolais), are
made from pinot noir is, historically, the most renowned area for the variety. The most
expensive pinots still come from this small place, including the most expensive and
legendary pinot noir of all: Romanée-Conti from the Domaine de la Romanée-Conti.
Prices for this wine can be significantly different based on the quality of the vintage, but
even modest vintages command double-take prices. A few years after they were released,
two vintages in the late 2000s, for example, carried price tags of $4,800 and $12,900.
That’s per bottle.
   In the New World, Oregon has specialized in pinot noir since the 1970s, and many of
the best delicate pinots in the United States come from here. And New Zealand is fast
emerging as the southern hemisphere’s Oregon. Yet, I’d argue that no place beats
California in terms of the sheer diversity, complexity, and deliciousness of pinot noir.
From the Sta. Rita Hills, Santa Maria Valley, and Santa Ynez Valley in south-central
California to the Santa Lucia Highlands in central California to Carneros, the Sonoma
Coast, and the Russian River Valley in the north (plus many other top small appellations in
between), California is a hotbed of fantastic pinot.

RIESLING
Riesling (REEZ-ling) is considered by many—possibly even most—wine experts to be the
most noble and unique white grape variety in the world. The grape is thought to have
originated in the Rheingau region of Germany, probably as one of the offspring of gouais
blanc and an unknown father.
   Great riesling has soaring acidity, an incomparable sense of purity and vividness, plus
considerable extract (the nonsoluble substances in wine that add to its flavor). Yet the wine
is wonderfully graceful on the palate and has a sense of energy that makes it seem light.
Indeed, great riesling is dangerously easy to drink.
   Given the right soil and winemaking methods, the triad of high acidity, high extract,
and relatively low alcohol leads to intensely flavorful wines of ravishing delicacy,
transparency, and gracefulness. Riesling’s refined structure is complemented by the
mouthwateringly delicate flavors of fresh ripe peaches, apricots, and melons, often pierced
with a vibrant mineral quality, like the taste of water running over stones in a mountain
stream.
   More than almost any other white grape, riesling is temperamental about where it is
planted. It doesn’t grow well in very warm places, and even in cooler sites, the quality and
character of the wine can vary enormously. The most elegant and precise rieslings come
from cool to cold climates—Germany, the Alsace region of France, Austria, Slovenia,
Canada, and upstate New York. Rieslings from a warmer climate, such as in Washington
State or California, are usually softer, slightly fuller, and can have less-precise, less-
minerally flavors. Usually is a key word here. Australia, for example, has a generally
warm climate. But in the cooler districts of the Clare and Eden valleys of Australia,
rieslings are usually ethereal, minerally, vibrantly fresh, and as taut as a tightrope.
    On the topic of dryness and sweetness, it’s not correct to assume that any given riesling
is probably going to be sweet. That’s not the case. In fact, most of the rieslings in the
world are dry. The exception, of course, are intentionally sweet styles such as
beerenauslese (BA) and trockenbeerenauslese (TBA).
   Admittedly some of the confusion about the sweetness level of riesling happens
because the wine is so fruity—that is, it tastes like fruits, especially peaches and apricots.
And in riesling’s case, the taster (you or me) confuses this dramatic fruitiness with
sweetness. To help clarify where a riesling stands in terms of the taste perception of
sweetness, the International Riesling Foundation (IRF), a global educational initiative,
created a Riesling Taste Profile chart. The chart, which producers use on the wine’s back
label, shows a spectrum from dry to medium dry to medium sweet to fully sweet. It then
pinpoints where that wine falls in terms of how sweet or dry it tastes. Importantly,
producers don’t just guess when it comes to their wine’s sweetness level. The IRF
developed sophisticated technical guidelines, which include the sugar-to-acid ratio and the
pH of the wine.

SANGIOVESE
Italy’s most famous grape, sangiovese (san-gee-oh-VAY-zee) is responsible for the three
great wines of Tuscany: Chianti Classico, vino nobile di Montepulciano, and brunello di
Montalcino. It’s also a major grape (if not the grape) in many of the prestigious wines
known as Super Tuscans. Outside Tuscany, sangiovese is used to make red wines in the
neighboring regions of Umbria and Emilia-Romagna (and there’s a bit in California), but
with a few notable exceptions, great sangiovese comes only from Tuscany, in central Italy.
   This said, surprising DNA research in 2004 revealed one of the parents of sangiovese to
be southern Italian—Calabrese di Montenuovo (presumed to be from Calabria).
   The other parent, ciliegiolo (Italian for “small cherry”), is cultivated all over Italy but
today is especially well known in Tuscany. It appears, then, that sangiovese may have
originated in southern Italy and only later spread to Tuscany.
   Sangiovese, like pinot noir, is old enough (and possibly genetically unstable enough) to
have mutated considerably, leading to hundreds (perhaps thousands) of clones. The
differences among these clones, coupled with differences in the sites where sangiovese is
planted, mean that the wines made from the grape vary widely in style and quality. Indeed,
from poor clones in poor sites, sangiovese can be as thin and dreary as red-stained, watery
alcohol. The top sangioveses, however, are as earthy, rich, and complex as a great sauce.

      A glass of great sangiovese, with its salty sensations, has historically been the
      perfect partner to Tuscany’s other great classic—peppery extra virgin olive
      oil.
   In flavor and structure, sangiovese is, again, closer to pinot noir than it is to cabernet
sauvignon. Sangiovese, for example, takes its structure primarily from acidity, rather than
tannin. When it’s young, sangiovese has the wonderful appeal of a fresh, warm cherry pie.
As it ages, the wine takes on dried leaf, dried orange peel, tea, mocha, spicy, peaty, earthy
flavors, and a fabulous sensation of minerality, even saltiness. (The latter is just a
metaphor; wine never contains significant sodium per se.) In fact, a glass of great
sangiovese, with its salty sensations, has historically been the perfect partner to Tuscany’s
other great classic—peppery extra virgin olive oil. Indeed, as any visitor to Tuscany can
attest, sangiovese-based wines seem to taste so much better in Tuscany. Is this as simple as
salt and pepper, perhaps?

SAUVIGNON BLANC
The name sauvignon comes from the French sauvage, meaning “wild.” It’s a fitting name
for a vine that, if left to its own devices, would grow with riotous abandon. Riotous,
untamed, and wild can also describe sauvignon blanc’s (SEW-vin-yawn BLAHNK)
flavors. Straw, hay, grass, smoke, green tea, green herbs, lime, and gunflint charge around
in your mouth with wonderful intensity. The wine appears almost linear on the palate, with
a clean, keen stiletto of acidity that vibrates through its center.
  Some sauvignons push the envelope even further, taking on a feral, acrid character
wine pros describe as cat pee. (This is usually considered a positive attribute.)
                               WHAT GREEN CAN MEAN
 One of the words most frequently used to describe the aroma and flavor of sauvignon blanc is green.
 The theme of green can, however, have many permutations. Here are the ones I think you’re most likely
 to find.
 GREEN IDEA What you might smell or taste in the wine
 GREEN FRUITS Green fig, honeydew melon
 BITTER GREEN A rugula, green tea
 EXOTIC GREEN Lemongrass, lime leaf
 SMOKY GREEN Lapsang souchong tea
 CITRUSY GREEN Lime pith
 GREEN VEGETABLES Snap peas, lettuce, green beans
 GREEN HERBS Sage, thyme, mint
 GREEN SPICE Green peppercorns
 PIQUANT GREEN Jalapeño peppers
 GREEN OUTDOORS Mown grass, meadows
 OCEANIC GREEN Seaweed, sea spray, briny saltwater

    The best, most outrageous, tangy sauvignons come from the Loire Valley of France
(Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé), from New Zealand, and from Austria. On the heels of these
come the sauvignons from South Africa and Chile. In Bordeaux, virtually all white wines
are made from a blend of sauvignon blanc plus sémillon. In blending the two, sauvignon’s
tart herbalness is mellowed by sémillon’s broad, clean character. Blending the two is also
sometimes done in California and Australia.
   Despite the assumption that sauvignon blanc probably originated in Bordeaux, most
leading geneticists believe the grape to have begun life in the Loire Valley. One of its
parents was probably savagnin; the other is unknown. (For its part, sauvignon blanc, with
the help of co-parent cabernet franc, begot cabernet sauvignon.)
    One of the widespread synonyms for sauvignon blanc is blanc fumé or fumé blanc (the
latter term is widely used in California, for example). This is purely a synonym; and it’s
not true that as a group, wines labeled fumé blanc have an especially smoky (fumé)
character.
   When sauvignon blanc is poorly made, it tastes vegetal—like canned asparagus, or the
water that artichokes have been boiled in. Sauvignon blanc can become vegetal if it’s
made from unripe grapes. This could happen, for example, if the vines were planted in
wet, fertile, poorly drained soil, or if the vines were allowed to grow out of control, or if
the grapes simply did not receive enough sunlight for proper photosynthesis.
                         Sauvignon blanc grapes ripening in the summer sun.


SÉMILLON
A friend once told me that sémillon (SEM-ee-yawn) always brought back his childhood
memories of the smell and flavor of cotton sheets as he ran under the clothesline on a
summer day. Whimsical as that description might seem, there can indeed be something
pure, clean, and starched about many sémillons, especially when they are young.
    In Bordeaux (sémillon’s birthplace), the grape is often blended with a bit of sauvignon
blanc (which is thought to be genetically linked, but the relationship between the two is
not yet clear). Sémillon’s broad, mouthfilling character gets a perfect lift from the lean
tartness of sauvignon blanc. In fact, the blend of sémillon and sauvignon is true not only
for dry white Bordeaux, but also for the region’s sweet wines, such as Sauternes. Sémillon
is ideal for Sauternes, as the grapes’ thin skins and loose bunches are readily attacked by
the noble rot, Botrytis cinerea (see page 157).
                   A bottle of red wine and two glasses—the historic makings of a great evening.

   The name sémillon, by the way, may be derived from the old pronunciation of St.-
Émilion, the well-known commune in Bordeaux now devoted to merlot and cabernet
franc, and no longer a place where sémillon is commercially made.
   With all due respect to Bordeaux, some of the greatest dry sémillons in the world are
made in Australia, where the wines are considered national treasures. Fascinatingly,
Australian sémillon (the Aussies pronounce it “SEM-i-lawn”) bears almost no
resemblance to the broad, lush sémillons of Bordeaux. Instead, Australian versions are
howlingly tart and full of almost tensile energy when young. With age, they become
radically transformed—taking on rich, honeyed flavors, a cashewlike nuttiness, and an
almost lanolin like texture. I will never forget being at Tyrrell’s, in the Hunter Valley of
New South Wales, and tasting their legendary “Vat 1” sémillons going back to the mid-
1960s. The wines were nothing short of mesmerizing.

                                 WHAT AMERICANS DRINK
    According to The America, by John J. Baxevanis, for most of history, in nearly every wine-producing
    country, red wines have been more popular than whites. Reds were easier to make in most parts of the world,
    and seemed better suited to hearty meals and the hard physical labor that agriculturally based economies
    required. Between the end of World War II and the early 1990s, however, white wine consumption in
    America increased thirty-four times. Changing lifestyles, the drastic reduction in agricultural employment,
    the rise in economic activity, central air-conditioning, refrigeration, and the dietary shift away from red
    meat to lighter meats, fish, and vegetables all helped transform the United States into a white-wine-drinking
    country. Today, however, the color split among wine drinkers in the United States is moving back to red. As
    of 2010, for example, among those who drank wine once a week or more, about 50 percent of what they
    drank was red, about 30 percent was white, and the rest was blush and rosé.


SYRAH
Syrah (sear-AH) has always reminded me of the kind of guy who wears cowboy boots
with a tuxedo. Manly yet elegant. In fact, at the turn of the twentieth century, the British
scholar and wine writer George Saintsbury described the famous Rhône wine Hermitage
(made exclusively from syrah) as the “manliest wine” he’d ever drunk.
   In France (where plantings are on the dramatic increase), syrah’s potent and exuberant
aromas and flavors lean toward leather, smoke, roasted meats, bacon, game, coffee, spices,
iron, black olive, and especially white and black pepper. The best wines have a kinetic
mouthfeel, with flavors that detonate on the palate like tiny grenades. The most dramatic
syrahs in the world come from the northern Rhône Valley. There, in exclusive, small wine
districts, such as Hermitage, Côte-Rôtie, and Cornas, the only red grape allowed is syrah.
In the southern Rhône Valley, syrah is usually part of the blends that make up
Châteauneuf-du-Pape and Gigondas. It is also planted throughout the Languedoc-
Roussillon. In Australia and California, syrah takes on a less gamey, more fruity, syrupy
character, but remarkably often possesses the same potent pepper spice character (in 2007,
Australian researchers isolated this as the aromatic compound rotundone).




                            A long, conical cluster of shiraz (syrah) grapes.
                                THE NOT-SO-PETITE PETITE
 What Californians call petite sirah (sometimes spelled petite syrah) is not the same as syrah, but the
 histories of the two are interwoven. Vines called petite sirah have grown in California since the 1880s. In
 the early days some of those vines were probably a type of syrah that had small—petite—grapes. (All
 things being equal, winemakers prefer small grapes because there’s a high ratio of skin to juice. Since
 color, flavor, and tannin come primarily from a grape’s skin, small grapes yield the most concentrated,
 flavorful wines.) Indeed, there is nothing petite about petite sirah.
    The wine is mouthfilling and often hugely tannic. Over the course of many decades in California’s early
 history, other vine types were often mixed in with petite sirah vines, creating what are known as field
 blends in the same vineyard. As more and different varieties found their way into California, and as new
 vineyards were begun with unidentified cuttings from older vineyards, petite sirah’s true identity grew
 more and more obscure. Then, in the 1990s, DNA typing revealed that most California petite sirah is
 actually the French grape durif, a cross of peloursin and syrah created in the 1880s. Today, some of the
 oldest “petite sirah” vineyards remain field blends of many varieties, including true syrah, durif, carignan,
 zinfandel, barbera, and even grenache.




At Cloudy Bay estate in Marlborough, New Zealand, the flavors of sauvignon blanc are explored in the context of food.
                            Now this is the sort of research you want to be in charge of.

   In the seventeenth century, French Huguenots brought syrah from France to South
Africa’s Cape of Good Hope. From South Africa, it was brought to Australia, although, as
of the 1830s, Australian explorers were also bringing syrah to the Australian continent
directly from France. Australia, of course, calls syrah shiraz. For its part, South Africa
uses both syrah and shiraz, depending on the preference of the winery. Most scholars think
the name shiraz is a corruption of one of the colloquial French names for the grape.
(Frustratingly, many wine articles continue to reproduce the erroneous legends that
syrah/shiraz somehow came from the Iranian city of Shiraz, the Greek island of Syra, or
the city of Syracuse in Sicily. All false.) Today, of course, shiraz is Australia’s most
famous red wine. Indeed, in appellations such as the Barossa Valley, McLaren Vale, and a
half dozen others, shiraz can be a spellbinding, spicy blockbuster of a wine.
    Syrah was brought to California three times, first in 1936, and then again in the early
1970s (see Syrah in California: Mysterious Beginnings, page 689). But syrah and other
Rhône grapes only began to grip the imaginations of maverick winemakers in California
in the 1980s, and a decade later, the same thing happened in Washington State. Today
syrah is well established in both places, although no single appellation has emerged as the
appellation of excellence. From a consumer standpoint, it’s important to know that syrah
producers in the United States can call their wine syrah or shiraz (depending on whether
the marketing department wants to channel its inner Aussie).
   Syrah is the progeny of two fairly obscure French grapes—dureza (cultivated in the
Ardèche) and mondeuse blanche (cultivated in the Savoie). For its part, dureza appears to
be the grandchild of pinot noir, which would make pinot noir the great grandfather of
syrah.

TEMPRANILLO
Spain’s most famous red grape, tempranillo (tem-pra-KNEE-oh), makes a huge range of
wine styles depending on where it is grown in Spain—and it’s grown in dozens of places.
Tempranillo is, for example, the main grape in the country’s famous wine region of Rioja.
Traditionally styled Rioja can resemble red Burgundy (pinot noir) in its refinement,
earthiness, and complexity. At the same time, tempranillo is also the grape that makes
blockbuster dense reds like tinta del Toro, of the Toro region, and the tinta del país of
Ribera del Duero. In short, various clones of tempranillo have, over time, adapted to
Spain’s diverse regions, and the wines that have resulted often have such highly
differentiated characters that they almost seem like separate varieties. Indeed, tempranillo
has a slew of different names in Spain, including ull de llebre (“eye of the hare”), cencibel,
tinto aragónez, and escobera, in addition to those named above.

      When young, tempranillo’s flavors are a burst of cherries. After aging, the
      wine tends to take on a deep, complex earthiness.

   Only one probable parent of tempranillo has been identified—the grape variety albillo
mayor, which today grows in Ribera del Duero. That said, tempranillo itself is thought to
have originated somewhere in the provinces of Rioja and Navarra, in northern Spain.
   Tempranillo is usually well structured and well balanced. Its significant amount of
tannin allows it to age for long periods, although the wine is generally not as firm on the
palate as cabernet sauvignon. Tempranillo’s level of acidity gives the wines made from it a
sense of precision, yet tempranillo is not as high in acidity as pinot noir. When young,
tempranillo’s flavors are a burst of cherries. After aging, the wine tends to take on a deep,
complex earthiness.
                   Come early winter, a few last grapes, now frozen, still cling to the vine.

   Tempranillo also grows in Portugal, where it’s known as tinta roriz and is one of the
grapes that make up Port wine. Additionally, the grape is grown in Argentina and
California.

VIOGNIER
A Los Angeles restaurateur once described viognier (vee-oh-NYAY) this way: “If a good
German riesling is like an ice skater (fast, racy, with a cutting edge), and chardonnay is
like a middle-heavyweight boxer (punchy, solid, powerful), then viognier would have to
be described as a female gymnast—beautiful and perfectly shaped, with muscle but superb
agility and elegance.”
   Viognier is one of the finest but rarest French white grapes. The grape nearly went
extinct in the 1960s, until it became fashionable in California and in Languedoc-
Roussillon. Today, fewer than 300 acres are planted in the grape’s home, the northern
Rhône. Through DNA analysis, it appears that viognier is related to mondeuse blanche,
and thus may be either a half sibling of syrah or possibly a grandparent of syrah.
   In the northern Rhône, viognier makes the prestigious wines Condrieu and Château-
Grillet. (A minuscule appellation, Château-Grillet has just one estate, also called Château-
Grillet. It is now owned by the Artemis Groupe, proprietors of Bordeaux’s Château
Latour). A small amount is also planted in among the syrah vines of the Côte-Rôtie. These
white viognier grapes are harvested, crushed, and fermented along with the syrah grapes,
giving Côte-Rôtie (which is a red wine after all) a slightly more exotic aroma than it might
otherwise have.
    Viognier is usually a full-bodied wine with honeysuckle, apricot, gingerbread, and
musky aromas and flavors, and a mesmerizingly lano-linish texture. Like gewürztraminer,
its extroverted fruity/floral aromas mean that many drinkers assume it’s a little sweet, even
when it’s bone-dry.




In Condrieu, in the northern Rhône Valley of France, the finicky viognier excels. The wines made here have aromas that
                                                are simply ravishing.

   Viognier exploded in popularity in the United States in the 1990s. In half a decade, the
number of California producers went from a mere few to more than thirty. By 1998 there
were more than a thousand acres of this variety planted in California. But the demand has
since ebbed there, and plantings are now in decline. One of the reasons may be that few
California viogniers have the beauty and purity of Condrieu. In California, viognier often
suffers from having too little acidity to give it definition, and the wine is too often oaked
to within an inch of its life (not true of Condrieu).




   Besides in France’s Rhône Valley and California (and a few other U.S. states such as
Virginia), viognier is also well known in Australia. Among the most exquisite viogniers
I’ve ever tasted have been those from the Australian producer Yalumba.

ZINFANDEL
For decades, zinfandel (ZIN-fan-dell) was the most widely planted red grape in California,
until cabernet sauvignon surpassed it in 1998. Now number two in acreage, zinfandel is a
chameleon. It can be (and is) made into everything from blush wine to sweet fortified
wine. But the zinfandel that knowledgeable wine drinkers love—true zinfandel—is a soft-
textured dry red wine crammed with jammy blackberry, boysenberry, and plummy fruit.
Made in this style, it’s usually concentrated, medium to full in body, and notorious for
(temporarily) staining one’s teeth crimson if you drink enough of it.
   Until 1972, zinfandel was always a hearty, rustic red wine. But in that year, the large
California winery Sutter Home made the first “white zinfandel”—actually light pink—by
quickly removing zinfandel’s red skins before much color was imparted to the wine.
   Soon after its invention, white zinfandel began to outsell true (red) zinfandel—a fact
that remains the case today. Yet because it is often slightly sweet and almost always mass-
produced from less-than-top-quality grapes, white zinfandel is considered a beginner’s
wine by serious wine drinkers.




       For over sixty-five years, Sutter Home has played a key role in the history of zinfandel In California.

   The zinfandel grape’s history in California goes back to the 1830s, when it was
imported from Croatia (then a part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire). In the 1990s, DNA
typing revealed zinfandel to be the Croatian grape called, in modern times, crljenak
kaštelanski. During the Middle Ages and earlier, however, the grape was called tribidrag
and was grown all over the Dalmatian coast of Croatia. Linguistically speaking, it’s not
known how tribidrag evolved to crljenak kaštelanski evolved to zinfandel. Moreover, in
southern Italy, where it grows predominantly in the region of Apulia, the same grape has
yet another distinct name: primitivo.
   Zinfandel vineyards are some of the oldest in California. Zinfandel vines well over a
hundred years old still thrive in Amador County and Sonoma County, for example. Wines
from old zinfandel vines are, in fact, especially prized, and many producers use the term
“old vine” on their zinfandel labels. The term has no legal definition, but many
winemakers suggest that a zinfandel vine—like a person—turns the corner, becoming
“old,” after forty.
    A GLOSSARY OF OTHER GRAPE VARIETIES WORLDWIDE
With five thousand to ten thousand grape varieties in the world, there are dozens a wine lover is bound to (and
should) discover. Following is a small handbook of the most noteworthy. While some of these grape varieties are
usually the sources of wines on their own—Spain’s verdejo and Italy’s dolcetto, for example—others, such as
France’s clairette, are very important as grapes used in blends. The list contains both red and white wine grapes,
designated as ● and ◯ respectively.
                                                          A
● AGIORGITIKO (AH-YOUR-YEE-TEE-KOH): The name, in Greek, means St. George’s grape. An
important, widely planted Greek grape, it is the source of Nemea, a spicy, earthy wine from the Peloponnese
peninsula. The grape variety has nothing to do with the rootstock called St. George.

● AGLIANICO (A-LEE-ANN-EE-CO): Ancient grape planted almost exclusively in southern Italy. In
Campania, it makes the famous wine called Taurasi, and in Basilicata, the wine aglianico del Vulture. Aglianico
appears to be related to several southern Italian grapes, but its parents are not known.
◯ AÏDANI (A-DAN-EE): Indigenous to Greece, this aromatic variety is mostly planted in Santorini and is used
in the island’s white blends.
◯ AIRÉN (I-WREN): The most widely planted grape of Spain, grown mainly on the central plains of Castilla-La
Mancha that were immortalized in Don Quixote. Used in blending (it’s often the base for inexpensive sparkling
wine around Europe) and on its own. Grown and made by small family wineries, it can make a fresh, lively,
minerally white (not unlike pinot grigio, only better) that’s a steal.
◯ ALBANA (AAL-BAAN-AAH): Ancient variety grown in the region of Emilia-Romagna, Italy, albana is
thought to be a descendant of garganega. The neutral, somewhat fruity, low-alcohol albana di Romagna was (rather
shockingly) the first wine to have been awarded the prestigious DOCG designation in Italy.
◯ ALBARIÑO: See page 54.
● ALBAROSSA (AL-BAR-OSS-A): A minor grape grown in the Piedmont region of Italy, a cross of barbera and
an obscure grape called chatus.
● ALEATICO (AL-EE-AT-I-KO): A fascinating, aromatic red possibly related to the white grapes greco and
muscat blanc à petits grains. Native to Tuscany, it is especially famous on the island of Elba, off the coast of
Tuscany, and the third largest island in Italy, after Sicily and Sardinia. Also grown in southern Italy.
● ALFROCHEIRO PRETO (AL-FRO-SHAY-ROO PRAY-TOH): Native to central or southern Portugal, high-
quality alfrocheiro preto is one of the important grapes in the red table wines of the Dão region.

● ALICANTE BOUSCHET (AL-I-KAN-TAY BOO-SHAY): The name for one of the last extant crosses of
garnacha (grenache) with petit Bouschet, crossed in France by Henri Bouschet in the mid-1800s. In Spain,
sometimes called garnacha tintorera. Innocuous in flavor but thick skinned, high yielding, and deeply colored. It is,
in fact, one of the very few grapes (red or white) in the entire Vitis vinifera family to have red flesh (known as
teinturier grapes). As such, alicante Bouschet has been used for decades in southern France to give light red wines
more color and the appearance of more flavor intensity. In California, it was used extensively during Prohibition to
make thin, watery wines seem like standard reds. Alicante Bouschet is still used in California, mainly in the Central
Valley, where it is a useful extender in jug wines. Should not be confused with the denomination Alicante in
southeastern Spain, where the main grape is monastrell (mourvèdre).
◯ ALIGOTÉ (AL-I-GO-TAY): Fairly rare grape of Burgundy, France, and a sibling of chardonnay (both grapes
are the progeny of pinot noir and gouais blanc). The light, tart white wine made from it is used with crème de cassis
in the Kir cocktail.
◯ ALVARINHO (AL-VAR-EEN-YO): The main grape of the light, low-alcohol, slightly spritzy wine known as
vinho verde, a specialty of northern Portugal. The same as the Spanish grape albariño (see page 54).
◯ ANSONICA (AN-SON-EE-CA): Also known as inzolia. Floral, high-acid variety considered one of the best
native white varieties in Sicily, Italy, and also grown in southern Tuscany. In Sicily, it was once used for Marsala,
but is now part of the blend for many white table wines.
● ARAGONEZ (AIR-AH-GO-NEZ): One of the Portuguese names for tempranillo. Grown primarily in southern
Portugal, where it is used in the red wines of the Alentejo region.
◯ ARINTO (AR-IN-TOE): More correctly known as arinto de Bucelas. High-quality Portuguese grape from the
area of Bucelas, north of Lisbon. Planted throughout Portugal because of its attractive ability to retain acidity.
Known as pederña in the Minho region, it is one of the grapes used in vinho verde.
◯ ARNEIS (AR-NACE): One of the three top white grapes of Italy’s Piedmont region, the other two being
cortese and moscato (muscat blanc à petits grains). Makes refreshing dry wines.
◯ ASPRINIO (AZ-PRIN-EE-O): Commonly known as asprinio bianco, it is indigenous to southern Italy’s
Campania region. Strikingly, the grape is still grown by the ancient method of allowing the vines to climb up local
poplar trees so that the vines rise 30 feet or more in the air.
◯ ASSYRTIKO (A-SEAR-TI-KO): Greek grape with lively acidity. A specialty of the volcanic island of
Santorini, in the Aegean.

◯ ATHIRI (AH-THEE-REE): Greek grape variety that is easy to grow and produces simple, pleasant wines
even at high yields.
◯ AUXERROIS (AUCHS-AIR-WAA): Fairly common grape in Alsace, France, where it originated as a
progeny of pinot noir and gouais blanc, making auxerrois a sibling of chardonnay. Usually blended into pinot blanc
in Alsace. Confusingly, in southwest France, auxerrois is a synonym for the red variety côt, or malbec.
● AUXERROIS (AUCHS-EAR-WAH): A confusing synonym for cot (also known as malbec) in southwestern
France—confusing because auxerrois is also the name of a white grape grown in Alsace, France.
● AZAL TINTO (AH-ZAL TEEN-TOE): A Portuguese variety with considerable acidity, used to make the
strident, rare red version of Portugal’s vinho verde. Its more proper name is amaral.
                                                          B
◯ BACO BLANC (BAA-CO BLAHNK): A French-American hybrid, also known as Baco 22A, it was
developed in 1898 by French nurseryman François Baco. Used as the basis for Armagnac until the 1970s, it
continues to be used in that distilled spirit, although to a lesser extent.

● BACO NOIR (BAA-KO NWAHR): One of the most famous French-American hybrids, created in 1902 by
French nurseryman François Baco. To obtain it, Baco crossed folle blanche with grand glabre (a variety belonging
to the American species Vitis riparia). It was cultivated in Burgundy and the Loire Valley until France officially
barred all hybrids from being grown in French vineyards. Baco noir is now principally found in New York State
and Canada.
● BAGA (BA-GAH): The word baga means berry in Portuguese. One of Portugal’s most widely planted red
grapes and the leading grape of the region of Bairrada.
● BARBERA: See page 54.
● BASTARDO (BAHS-TAR-DOE): Yes, the name means bastard (in Portuguese). A common workhorse grape
for dry Portuguese reds, including those made in the Douro and to a lesser extent, the Dão. Bastardo was brought to
Portugal some two centuries ago from its native homeland, the Jura region of France, where it is known as
trousseau.
◯ BLANC DU BOIS (BLAHNK DUE BWAA): A white hybrid developed in 1968 at the University of Florida
and now grown in Florida, Texas, and throughout the Gulf states. Unlike many grapes, it is well suited to humid
climates. Blanc du bois also has good resistance to Pierce’s disease, a fatal infliction, and one with no known
remedy to date, caused by insects known as sharpshooters. Blanc du bois’ genetic parentage is complex. The grape
is a cross of an American hybrid belonging to the muscadine family with the red grape cardinal, itself a cross of two
vinifera grapes, flame seedless and ribier.
● BLAUBURGUNDER (BLAUW-BRR-GUN-DER): The Austrian name for pinot noir; see page 594.
● BLAUER PORTUGIESER (BLAUW-ER POR-CHEW-GAY-ZER): A prolific vine that has nothing to do
with Portugal. Very widely planted in Austria (its probable home) and elsewhere in Eastern Europe, including,
notably, Hungary. Also used in many simple red German blends.
● BLAUFRÄNKISCH (BLAUW-FRANK-ISH): A highly esteemed Austrian variety—probably of Austrian or
Hungarian origin—that can make delicious, spicy, precise, earthy, deeply colored reds, especially in Burgenland
(the warmest of the Austrian wine regions). Also the leading red in Hungary (where it is called kékfrankos) and
grown in Washington State, where it is called by its German name, Lemberger. DNA analysis indicates it is
probably the progeny of gouais blanc.
● BOBAL (BO-BAAL): Indigenous Spanish red that is grown principally in the Utiel-Requena region of north
central Spain. Historically used in blending, but increasingly made into fascinating, spicy, delicious wines that are
not unlike grenache.
● BONARDA (BO-NAR-DA): The second most popular variety in Argentina after malbec. Although it is called
bonarda, this grape is not the same as the relatively rare, indigenous Italian variety bonarda Piedmontese that is
grown in Piedmont. Rather, Argentine bonarda has been shown to be the French grape douce noir (sweet black),
which originated in the Savoie region of France. In France, the grape is also known as corbeau (meaning crow, a
reference to the grape’s black color) and char-bonneau, which was shortened in California to charbono. (Cult
followers of California’s now rare charbono will be happy to know they can switch to Argentine bonarda.)
◯ BOURBOULENC (BORE-BOO-LAHNK): Ancient, simple-tasting Provençal variety, today used in blends
throughout the South of France, in the white wines of appellations such as Châteauneuf-du-Pape, Côtes-du-Rhône,
Corbières, Minervois, and Bandol.
● BRACHETTO (BRA-KET-OH): Native to and found primarily in Piedmont, Italy, around the towns of Asti
and Alessandria, where it is used to make brachetto d’Acqui, a deep-red-colored and delicious, if somewhat soda
pop–like, sparkling wine.
◯ BUAL (BOO-ALL): Cultivated on the island of Madeira, bual—sometimes spelled boal—is the grape that
makes the rich, sweet style of Madeira also known as bual or boal. The grape is the same as malvasia fina and is
also used for dry white table wines in the Dão region of Portugal.
                                                          C
● CABERNET FRANC: See page 54.
● CABERNET SAUVIGNON: See page 56.
● CALITOR (CAL-I-TOR): One of the lesser red grapes used in France’s southern Rhône. Calitor is virtually
always blended.
● CANAIOLO (CAN-AYE-OH-LOW): An important blending grape in Tuscany and throughout central Italy.
Canaiolo is used as part of the blend in making Chianti, where it serves to soften sangiovese’s tannic firmness and
acidic bite.
● CANNONAU (CAN-AN-OW): The famous red grape of the Italian island of Sardinia. The same grape as
grenache/garnacha (see page 60).

◯ CAPE RIESLING (CAPE REEZ LING): A widely planted grape in South Africa, where it is used mostly in
cheap blends. Not the same as true riesling, Cape riesling is thought to be related to the obscure French grape
crouchen blanc.
● CARDINAL (CAR-DIN-AHL): A vigorous, high-yielding cross of a Hungarian table grape and a French table
grape, in which both grapes were themselves obscure crosses. Grown in Texas and Florida.
● CARIGNAN (CARE-I-NYAN): The French name for the Spanish grape mazuelo, which originated in
northeastern Spain, probably in Aragón, and is used today in Rioja as part of the blend. In some parts of Spain
(such as Priorat, which also grows a lot of the grape), mazuelo carries the name cariñena. (The French name
carignan is probably derived from cariñena.) Despite being an important grape in Spain, there is far more carignan
growing in France. Earthy-flavored and powerful, with dark color, relatively high acidity, and high tannin, it is
mostly used for blending in the Languedoc-Roussillon, and to a lesser extent in Provence and the Rhône. In Italy,
on the island of Sardinia, it’s known as carignano. Also grown in California, where it is spelled carignane and is
often a part of inexpensive blends.
● CARMENÈRE (CAR-MEN-AIR): An ancient Bordeaux variety (also known in Bordeaux as grande vidure)
whose parents are cabernet franc and gros cabernet. Carmenère’s half siblings are cabernet sauvignon and merlot.
While virtually extinct in Bordeaux today, the grape is now widespread in Chile, where it is considered the leading
red and can make complex, intensely red-hued wines. The name may derive from the word carmin—crimson in
Latin—and is a reference to the vivid red color of the variety’s leaves come harvest time. In China, carmenère is
known as cabernet gernischt or cabernet shelongzhu (literally cabernet snake pearl).
◯ CARRICANTE (CARE-I-CAHN-TAY): A white grape indigenous to Sicily and known for its high yield and
acidity. Also known as catarrato.
◯ CATARRATTO BIANCO (CAT-A-RHAT-O BEE-AHN-CO): Bland but hearty Italian variety grown widely
in Sicily and used as a blending grape, especially for Marsala. At lower yields it makes a more interesting wine. On
Mt. Etna in Sicily, it is called carricante. The grape is probably the progeny of garganega.
● CATAWBA (CA-TAW-BA): Found mostly in the northeastern part of the United States, where it is used for
juice, jams, and jellies, as well as wine. With its hard-to-describe grapey/animal fur aroma and flavor, often called
“foxy,” the grape may be a hybrid or a cross; its parents are unknown. Made into light red and rosé wines,
especially in New York State.
◯ CAYUGA (KAI-OOO-GA): An important French-American hybrid, especially in the Finger Lakes region of
New York State, where it is made into off-dry and sweet wines.
● CHAMBOURCIN (SHAM-BORE-SAIN): A French-American hybrid created (through multiple crossings of
crossings) sometime in the late 1940s, but available only since the 1960s. Highly thought of thanks to its “lack of
hybrid taste”—in other words, no pronounced grapey/animal fur aromas and flavors. Makes good and very good
wines in many eastern and midwestern states of the United States, including Missouri, New Jersey, New York, and
Virgina.
● CHARBONO (SHAR-BO-NO): Native to the Savoie region of France, where it is properly known as douce
noir (“sweet black”), but is also known by the names corbeau and charbonneaux (in California this was later
shortened to charbono). Tiny amounts are still grown in California, where the wine has a small but cult following.
In Argentina, douce noir is called bonarda, which means that California’s charbono and Argentina’s bonarda are the
same variety.

◯ CHARDONNAY: See page 57.
◯ CHASSELAS (SHAAS-I-LAS): Ancient, low-acid variety also known as fendant. Best known in the French-
speaking part of Switzerland, where it probably originated near Lake Geneva. Also cultivated to a smaller extent in
Alsace. In Germany it is referred to as gutedel.

● CHENIN BLANC: See page 58.
● CILIEGIOLO (CHEE-LEE-EH-JOE-LOW): If you aren’t Italian, don’t try to say this three times fast. Once
only used sparingly in low-cost Italian red blends, ciliegiolo’s popularity has increased dramatically in the past ten
years, and this grape, with its fresh, cherrylike flavors (ciliegiolo means “cherry” in Italian), is now a component of
many DOC wines, especially in Tuscany. Ciliegiolo and Calabrese di Montenuovo are thought to be the parents of
sangiovese.
● CINSAUT (SIN-SO): Southern French grape today grown all over the south of France and in the southern
Rhône; most frequently used in blends, where it adds a slight spiciness. It can also be found in Algeria, Morocco,
and Tunisia. In South Africa, where the grape was confusingly called Hermitage (a region in the Rhône Valley, in
France), it was crossed with pinot noir to create pinotage. Sometimes spelled cinsault.
◯ CLAIRETTE (CLARE-ET): At low yields this variety is beautifully fresh and aromatic. A common blending
component in many white wines of southern France, including those of Provence, Châteauneuf-du-Pape, and Côtes-
du-Rhône.

◯ COLOMBARD: see French Colombard.
● CONCORD (CON-CORD): The most well-known American grape variety in New York State. It belongs to the
species Vitis labrusca and was first found growing wild near the Concord River in Concord, Massachusetts. Makes
distinctly flavored but not very highly esteemed wines with brazen, candylike aromas and flavors. Although it is
used in basic kosher wines like Manischewitz, Concord is much more appreciated as juice and jelly than as wine.
● CORNALIN (CORE-NA-LAN): Ancient variety from the Val d’Aosta of northwest Italy, but now virtually
extinct there. Better known today in Switzerland, where it grows in the Valais, and is sometimes called humagne
rouge. Considered the top red in a country better known for its whites.
◯ CORTESE (CORE-TAYS-AY): Northwestern Italian grape that makes the medium-bodied wine Gavi,
historically the most prized white wine of Piedmont, Italy.

● CORVINA (CORE-VEE-NA): Considered the most important red grape in the blends that make the well-
known Italian wines Amarone and Valpolicella, in the Veneto. It probably originated in the area around Verona; one
of its parents is refosco dal peduncolo rosso (refosco with the red stem). The name corvina may derive from corvo
(crow, a reference to the color of the grapes). Usually blended with its progeny, rondinella, and with molinara.
● CÔT (CO): The enologically correct name for malbec. An old variety that originated near the southern French
region of Cahors, where it is still the specialty. In Cahors, côt makes a strapping, highly tannic wine that could not
be more different from plush Argentine malbec. Côt’s parents are prunelard and magdeleine noire des Charentes.
The latter is also the mother of merlot.
● COUNOISE (COON-WAZ): One of the common, if lesser, red grapes in France’s southern Rhône Valley. Used
in Gigondas and sometimes in Châteauneuf-du-Pape.
● CRIOLLA (CREE-OH-LA): Criolla, Spanish for creole, is a group of several Vitis vinifera varieties that are
historically important in the Americas, especially South America. Their story is convoluted. To begin with, the
criollas may have originated naturally in South America as the progeny of European varieties brought earlier, or
they may have been cultivated from seeds or cuttings brought by Spanish and Portuguese conquistadores. Here are
a few of the important criollas: Criolla grande is a pinkish-skinned grape that probably originated in Argentina,
where it is still used to make neutral cheap wine. Another criolla called cereza (the word means cherry in Spanish)
also originated in Argentina, as the progeny of criolla chica and muscat of Alexandria. For its part, criolla chica
(Creole girl) is the same as the Spanish grape listán prieto, an old variety from Castilla La Mancha. It was brought
to Argentina and Chile in the mid-sixteenth century. By the nineteenth century, criolla chica had, in Chile, been
renamed país (“country”). Around the same time, listán prieto was brought from Spain to Argentina and Chile, it
was also brought to Mexico by Franciscan missionaries, and there it was renamed misión. Later, in California,
misión’s spelling was changed to mission. Thus, in the end, Chile’s criolla chica (país) and California’s mission are
the same, and both are the Spanish grape listán prieto. Argentina’s criolla grande is related, but it’s not known how.
And Argentina’s cereza is a cross of criolla chica (aka país, aka listán prieto) and muscat of Alexandria. See also
Listán prieto.
                                                         D
● DELAWARE (DELL-A-WARE): More pink-skinned than truly red, this French-American hybrid (whose
parentage is cloudy) is grown primarily in the Lake Erie region of New York State, but also in Michigan and Ohio,
where it was created. Makes soda pop-ish wines. Curiously, Delaware is also grown in Japan.

● DOLCETTO (DOLE-CHET-OH): A fruity, low-acid grape (the name means “little sweet”) made into a
delicious, fruity, licoricey, bitter-edged everyday wine—the quaffing wine of northern Italy’s Piedmont region,
although barbera is, more and more, taking over that role.
● DORNFELDER (DORN-FELL-DER): German cross of two crosses (Helfensteiner and Heroldrebe) bred in
1956 and honorifically named for an important eighteenth-century viticulturist—Immanuel August Ludwig
Dornfeld. Makes darkly colored, soft wines, mostly in the Rheinhessen and Pfalz.
● DOUCE NOIR (DUE-SAY NWAHR): Old French variety from the Savoie region, often called corbeau
(“crow”). In California, the now rare variety called charbono is douce noir, and in Argentina, the variety bonarda is
douce noir.
● DURIF (DUR-EEF): A variety created sometime just before the 1860s by French botanist François Durif. A
cross of syrah and the now obscure French grape peloursin. Although Durif has virtually disappeared in France, it
lives on in California, where it is known as petite sirah. Alas, some (but a minority) of so-called petite sirah
vineyards in California are simply peloursin, and some may be extensive field blends that include peloursin and
Durif.
                                                       E
◯ EHRENFELSER (ERRAN-FELL-SIR): A German cross of riesling and silvaner now popular in Canada,
where it’s often made into eiswein.

◯ EMERALD RIESLING (EM-ER-ELD REEZ-LING): A cross of muscadelle and garnacha developed at the
University of California at Davis. Now only tiny amounts are grown, and the grapes are used mostly for jug wines.
◯ ENCRUZADO (EN-CREW-ZAH-DOH): Important grape in the dry white wines of Portugal’s Dão region.
                                                           F
◯ FALANGHINA (FAA-LAN-GHEE-NA): More properly falanghina flegrea, this is an ancient grape made
into white wines in southern Italy’s Campania region, in the districts of Falerno del Massico and Sannio. The name
may derive from the Latin falangae, for the stakes that support vines.

◯ FENDANT (FEN-DAHNT): See Chasselas.
◯ FIANO (FEE-AH-NO): An ancient grape cultivated near Avellino, in Campania, in southern Italy. The fiano
of Apulia is thought to be an entirely separate variety.
◯ FOLLE BLANCHE (FOAL BLONCH): Once, but no longer, a leading grape in Cognac and Armagnac.
Today used mostly in the western Loire to produce the extremely tart, thin Gros Plant. Also known as mune
mahatsa in Spain’s Basque region, it is one of the varieties used to make the tart, dry white wine Txakoli.
● FREISA (FRAY-ZHAH): Bitter, acidic, aromatic red grape of the northwestern Italian province of Piedmont.
Thought to be an offspring of nebbiolo, it was traditionally made into a frothy, slightly sparkling, pale red wine with
a touch of sweetness. Today, it is often made in a still, dry style.
◯ FRENCH COLOMBARD (FRENCH CALL-UM-BARD): More correctly known simply as colom-bard, it
is widely planted in the southwest of France, where it is mostly distilled into eaux-de-vie, Cognac, and Armagnac.
In California, it is a high-yielding grape made into jug wines. Known as colombar in South Africa, where it is also
made into jug wines.
◯ FRIULANO (FREE-OO-LAHN-OH): Formerly known in Italy as tocai Friulano and planted mostly in the
northeastern Italian region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia, it is the source of somewhat spicy, lightly floral, medium-
bodied wines that are considered among the region’s best. The same grape as sauvignonasse, sometimes called
sauvignon vert, a grape well established in Chile.
◯ FURMINT (FUR-MINT): Native to Hungary and the major grape in the famous Hungarian botrytized sweet
wine Tokaji aszú. Furmint is also used for dry wine. Also grown in Austria.
                                                            G
● GAGLIOPPO (GAL-EE-OH-PO): An ancient grape variety and natural cross of sangiovese and mantonico
bianco, an obscure variety from the region of Calabria. Gaglioppo is the main grape today in Calabria, where it is
the source of the grapey red Italian wine Cirò.

● GAMAY: See page 59.
◯ GARGANEGA (GAR-GAN-I-GA): An ancient variety most closely associated with the northern Italian
region of the Veneto, and the major grape of Soave. Garganega is thought to be one of the parents of many other
Italian white varieties, including trebbiano Toscana, malvasia bianca di Candida, albana, and catarratto bianco.
● GARNACHA: See Grenache, page 60.
◯ GARNACHA BLANCA (GAR-NA-CHA BLAHNK-A): See Grenache blanc.
◯ GELBER MUSKATELLER (GEL-BER MUS-CA-TELLER): Sometimes simply muskateller, this is the
Austrian name for muscat blanc à petits grains. See Muscat, page 63.
◯ GEWÜRZTRAMINER: See page 59.
● GIRÒ (JEER-OH): An ancient grape variety that is grown on the large Italian island of Sardinia. Girò may be
of Spanish origin.
◯ GLERA (GLARE-AH): Ancient northern Italian grape also known as prosecco, and used to make the Italian
sparkling wine Prosecco. In 2009, when the wine Prosecco was awarded DOCG status (the highest rank for an
Italian wine), the grape name prosecco was officially discontinued to avoid confusion. Glera, which had been an old
synonym for the prosecco grape, henceforth came into official use.
◯ GODELLO (GO-DAY-YO): Major white grape made into wines in northwestern Spain, in the remote
mountainous region of Valdeorras, although the grape’s origin is probably in Galicia, next door. Makes wines that
can have a full body and a viscous, almost lanolin-like mouthfeel.
◯ GOUAIS BLANC (GOO-AY BLAHNK): One of the prolific ancient “founder varieties,” and as such, a parent
and grandparent to a slew of other varieties, including such disparate varieties as riesling, muscadelle,
blaufränkisch, and colombard. No known wine from gouais blanc is made today, though a few isolated vines may
still exist in the Haute-Savoie region of France.
◯ GOUVEIO (GOH-VAI-YOU): One of the grapes used to make the dry white wines of the Dão and the Douro
Valley in Portugal, and also used in the making of white Port. The same grape as Spain’s godello.
● GRACIANO (GRA-SEE-AN-OH): High-quality, late-ripening Spanish grape, with delicate, slightly spicy
flavors and an ability to hold onto its acidity even in warm places. Used primarily in Rioja, as part of traditional
Rioja blends. Also found to a small extent in the Languedoc-Roussillon, where it is confusingly called morrastel
(which sounds like monastrell, but the grape is entirely different). On the Italian island of Sardinia, it’s known as
bovale sardo, and is much appreciated as an addition to blends.
◯ GRAŠEVINA (GRAH-SHEH-VINA): The most widely planted white grape in Croatia. Known in Austria as
welschriesling and in northern Italy as riesling Italico, although it is not related to riesling.
◯ GRAUBURGUNDER (GRAOW BUR-GUND-ER): One of the German names for the grape pinot gris, which
is also known as ruländer.
◯ GRECHETTO (GREH-CHET-OH): Grown in the central Italian province of Umbria, it is one of the grapes
that make the medium-bodied Italian wine Orvieto.
◯ GRECO (GREC-OH): An ancient variety now grown primarily in the southern Italian region of Campania,
where it is made into distinctive white wines, the most famous of which is greco di Tufo.
● GRENACHE: See page 60.
◯ GRENACHE BLANC (GREN-AHSH BLAHNK): A white-berried clonal mutation of the red grape
grenache. Grenache blanc is a leading blending grape in the white wines of southern France, including the whites of
Provence, the Languedoc-Roussillon, and the southern Rhône. More properly known as garnacha blanca, since it
originated in Spain.

● GRIGNOLINO (GREE-NO-LEE-NO): Native to Piedmont, Italy, where it is the source of light-reddish,
frothy, crisp wines that can also have a tannic bite. The name may come from grignòle, a Piedmontese dialect word
for pips or seeds, because grignolino is known for the high number of seeds in each berry.
◯ GRILLO (GREE-LOH): One of the main white grapes of Sicily, where it can make fantastically refreshing,
floral, peppery dry white wines. Also, along with catarratto bianco, one of the two grapes used in Sicily to make
Marsala. Grillo’s parents were catarratto bianco and muscat of Alexandria.

● GROLLEAU (GROW-LOH): A mostly uninspired grape used primarily in France’s Loire Valley, in the red and
rosé wines of Anjou.
◯ GRÜNER VELTLINER: See page 61.
◯ GUTEDEL (GOOT-I-DEL): German name for the Swiss grape chasselas. In Germany, it is planted mostly in
the Baden region, where it makes basic wines.
                                                         H
◯ HANEPOOT (HAHN-E-POOT): See Muscat, page 63.
◯ HÁRSLEVELŰ (HARSH-LEH-VEH-LOO): Aromatic Hungarian grape that lends a smooth, spicy character
to the renowned botrytized sweet wine Tokaji aszú. Native to Hungary, hárslevelű is a progeny of furmint.
● HONDARRIBI BELTZA (HONDA-REE-BEE BELT-ZA): Beltza means black in Basque. Used to make the
somewhat rare, light, lively, crisp red Txakolí (shah-co-LEE) of Spain’s Basque region. Like cabernet sauvignon
and carmenère, hondarribi beltza is one of the decendents of cabernet franc. Despite its name, it is not related to
hondarribi zuri (white hondarribi).
◯ HONDARRIBI ZURI (HONDA-REE-BEE ZURI): Indigenous to Spain’s Basque region, this is the name
given to the leading variety of grape in the region’s sassy, high-acid white Txakolí (shah-co-LEE) wines (zuri
means white in Basque). However, DNA analysis has revealed that what is called hondarribi zuri is actually not a
single variety but rather any one of three white grapes planted in the Basque region: courbu blanc, crouchen, or the
hybrid noah.
◯ HUXELREBE (HOUKS-EL-RAY-BA): Developed in Germany, this unusual cross of chasselas (also known
as gutedel) and the obscure grape courtillier musqué makes aromatic wines, especially in Germany’s Pfalz and
Rheinhessen regions.
                                                         I
◯ INZOLIA (IN-ZOL-EE-AH): See Ansonica.
◯ IRSAI OLIVÉR (EER-SHA-EE OH-EYE-VEHR): A white Hungarian grape that was originally bred to be a
table grape but is now often used to produce soft, aromatic wines that are best drunk young.
◯ ISABELLA (IS-A-BELL-AH): An American hybrid probably derived from a seedling that occurred in nature
when an unknown variety within the species Vitis labrusa crossed with an unknown variety of the Vitis vinifera
species. The grape was brought from South Carolina to New York in the early 1800s by a grower, George Gibbs,
whose wife was named Isabella. Now planted in places as disparate as Japan, New York State, India, and Brazil.
Unlike most grape varieties, Isabella grows well in semitropical and humid conditions.
◯ IZKIRIOT TTIPI (EE-SKEE-REE-OT TEE-PEE): The Basque name for petit manseng, which is grown in
Spain’s Basque region to make the tart, dry white wine known as Txakolí.
                                                         J
● JAEN (JAI-EN): See Mencía.
◯ JUHFARK (YOO-FARK): A minor white grape mostly grown in the volcanic soils of the Somló region of
Hungary. It makes wines that are high in acid and often more salty and minerally than fruity.
                                                          K
● KADARKA (KAH-DAR-KAH): An Eastern European variety, especially important in Hungary, where it is
grown throughout the country. Makes light-colored, spicy, earthy wines that have a similarity to simple pinot noir.

● KÉKFRANKOS (KEK-FRANK-OSH): A leading red grape in Hungary, probably of Hungarian or Austrian
origin. It makes spicy, earthy, deeply colored reds in Hungary, Austria’s Burgenland, and in Washington State,
where it is called by its German name, Lemberger. DNA analysis indicates it is probably the progeny of gouais
blanc.
◯ KERNER (KER-NER): A popular and often delicious German variety created by crossing the red trollinger
(schiava) grape with the white riesling grape. Named after a nineteenth-century medical doctor and songwriter,
Justinius Kerner, who prescribed wine as good natural medicine.
◯ KHIKHVI (KEEK-VEE): Rare variety from the Republic of Georgia, where it is still grown and made into
highly thought of dry and sweet wines.
◯ KIRÁLYLEÁNKYA (KEE-RAH-LEE-LEE-ANK-YA): Widely planted white Hungarian grape with fresh
acidity and citrus flavors, whose name means “little princess.”
◯ KOSHU (KO-SHOO): Widely planted Japanese variety grown in several areas of that country, including the
Mt. Fuji area. Legend has it that the grape is a cross of a native, wild Japanese grape with a vinifera variety that was
brought from the Caucasus to China and then, by Buddhist monks, to Japan approximately a thousand years ago.
But DNA typing has revealed no relationships with other known varieties, and thus koshu’s origins remain a
mystery. The first mentions of the variety being made into wine in Japan go back to the 1870s. Historically the wine
was produced in a sweet style; today it is made as a dry, delicate, low-alcohol, crisp white, not unlike Muscadet.
● KOTSIFALI (KOT-SI-FAHL-EE): Unique to the Greek island of Crete, its home. Kotsifali makes a light,
strawberry-scented red, and is one of the varieties in the Greek wines Achárnes and Pezá.
● KRASSATO (KRAH-SAH-TOE): Fairly full-bodied Greek variety thought to be indigenous to the area around
Mt. Olympus, on the Greek mainland. Blended with xinomavro and stavroto to make the wine Rapsáni.
                                                          L
● LACRIMA DI MORRO D’ALBA (LAK-REE-MA DEE MORE-O DAL-BA): The word lacrima (meaning
“tears”) is used for several different Italian varieties and wines. The most important of the grape varieties is lacrima
di Morro d’Alba, which is the dominant variety in the wine also called lacrima di Morro d’Alba, a fruity red of
Italy’s Marche region (not the same as Alba in Piedmont).

● LAGREIN (LAH-GRAYNE): A distinctive, fruity, bitter northern Italian variety probably indigenous to the
Alto Adige region, where most of it grows today. One of its parents is teroldego; the other is unknown. It is
sometimes blended with schiava.
● LAMBRUSCO (LAM-BRUCE-KO): The name lambrusco means wild grape. There are more than thirteen
different varieties with the word lambrusco or lambrusca in their names. A small number are cultivated in
Piedmont, but the majority are more famously in Emilia-Romagna, where the refreshing, very slightly sweet or dry
fizzy wine called lambrusco is a specialty. Because of its fizz and acidity, lambrusco is traditionally drunk as a
counterpoint to Emilia-Romagna’s famous salumi and rich meat pasta sauces.

◯ LAŠKI RIZLING (LASH-KEE REEZ-LING): See Welschriesling.
● LEMBERGER (LEM BRR GER): The German name for the dark, spicy, Austrian grape blaufränkisch. Grown
in small amounts in Washington State, where it is called Lemberger. See also Blaufränkisch.
● LENOIR (LEN-NWAHR): A complex American hybrid originally created in the southeastern part of the United
States and named after Lenoir County, in South Carolina. It was eventually taken further south, to Mississippi, by a
Spanish man named Jacquez; hence Jacquez is a synonym, as is black Spanish, thanks to the deep color of the
grape’s skin. (Note that several different varieties have black Spanish as a synonym.) Widely planted in southeast
and central Texas, where it has appeared to evolve a natural resistance to Pierce’s disease (a potentially fatal vine
disease caused by insects known as sharpshooters) despite the heat and humidity of the climate. Also widely
planted in Brazil, where it is used for juice, jelly, and jug wines.
● LIATIKO (LEE-AT-E-KO): The most widely planted grape on the Greek island of Crete. Makes floral, spicy,
pale reds with relatively high acidity. Used for dry and sweet wines.
● LIMNIO (LIM-KNEE-OH): Ancient Greek variety said to have been appreciated by Aristotle. Native to the
island of Limnos, in the northern Aegean, and now planted all over northern Greece. Sometimes blended with
cabernet sauvignon and cabernet franc.
● LISTÁN PRIETO (LEE-STAN PRE-ET-OH): A dark-skinned grape (prieto means dark in Spanish) native to
the region of Castilla La Mancha in central Spain. In the sixteenth century, listán was brought on several occasions
to the Americas, where the grape had a profound influence on the early viticultural history of many countries.
Indeed, listán prieto was the first European (Vitis vinifera) variety to be cultivated in the Americas. The grape was
brought directly and independently to Argentina, Chile, and Mexico. In Chile, listán came to be known as criolla
chica, “Creole girl” (see Criolla, page 81), and was later renamed país. In Mexico, listán was introduced by
Franciscan missionaries, who renamed it misión. It traveled eventually to Baja California (present day Mexico),
then up to Alta California, where it was planted (spelled mission) at the Mission San Diego de Alcalá around 1770.
In Argentina, listán prieto crossed naturally with muscat of Alexandria to create several grapes, including cereza,
torrontés Riojano, and possibly torrontés Sanjuanino. A small amount of listán prieto is still grown on the Canary
Islands in Spain, and a huge amount is still grown in Chile as país. In California, as mission, 600 acres (242
hectares) are left.
                                                         M
◯ MACABEO (MAC-A-BAY-OH): Northern Spanish grape also known as viura. One of the three grapes used
in cava, Spanish sparkling wine, and the primary grape in the white wines of Rioja. A small amount is grown in the
Rhône, in France, where it is used in the appellation of Lirac; it is also used to a small extent in the Languedoc-
Roussillon.

◯ MADELEINE ANGEVINE (MAD-EH-LIN AN-JE-VINE): A cross of a cross of a cross created in the Loire
Valley in the mid-nineteenth century and now grown in extremely limited amounts, mostly in British Columbia,
Canada. A seedling of madeleine angevine crossed with an unknown parent—so-called madeleine x angevine 7672
—is somewhat more famous as a pleasantly floral grape variety grown principally in England.
● MAGDELEINE NOIRE DES CHARENTES (MAG-DEH-LIN NWAHR DAY SHAR-AWNT): This obscure,
rare French variety is the parent (with cabernet franc) of merlot, and (with prune-lard) of malbec grapes. Thought to
have been cultivated since the Middle Ages, magdeleine noire des Charentes was rediscovered in the 1990s in the
Charente department of southwestern France, where it was known as raisin de la madeleine. But DNA typing
revealed no genetic relationship to other varieties with the word madeleine in the name. In the 2000s, the scientists
renamed the variety magdeleine noire des Charentes in a not-completely-successful attempt to distinguish it from
other magdeleines. (As part of a grape’s name, “magdeleine” is thought to refer to the feast day of Mary Magdalene
—July 22—a recognition of the fact that all the “madeleines” are extremely early ripeners and are often harvested
in July.)
◯ MALAGOUSIA (MAH-LAH-GOU-ZYAH): Historic variety native to central Greece. Lively and perfumed,
it is grown with success in Macedonia in particular.
● MALBEC: See page 61.
◯ MALMSEY (MALM-ZEE): See Malvasia.
◯ MALVASIA (MAHL-VA-ZEE-AH): Like muscat, malvasia is not a single variety but a collective name for a
wide variety of Mediterranean grapes (white, pink, and black skinned), most of which are not actually related. What
some of them do share, however, is an ability to result in sweet wines that are high in alcohol. Greece has been put
forward as the original home of malvasia, but DNA testing does not support this idea. Among the different varieties
—all with malvasia in the name—are malvasia bianca di Candia (the most planted type of malvasia, and common
in Italy); malvasia bianca lunga (used in Tuscany for vin santo, and historically in Chianti, where it was part of the
original Chianti “formula”); malvasia branca de São Jorge (the malvasia used to make malmsey Madeira); and
malvasia di Lipari (which makes the famous Sicilian passito dessert wine of the same name; confusingly, this is
also known as malvasia candida, which sounds awfully close to malvasia bianca di Candia). Malmsey is an English
corruption of the word malvasia.
◯ MALVOISIE (MAHL-VWA-ZEE): See Vermentino.
● MAMMOLO (MAM-MO-LOW): Old Tuscan variety grown in central Italy as well as on the island of Corsica,
where it is known as sciaccarello (“crunchy”). In Tuscany, it is often blended with sangiovese.
● MANDILARIA (MAN-DELL-ARE-EE-AH): A darkly colored, tannic grape native to the Greek islands of the
eastern Aegean. Blended in small amounts with kotsifali to make the wines Arhánes and Pezá, on Crete. Also
grown on numerous other Greek islands, including Santorini and Pylos, and all over the southern Peloponnese
peninsula.
● MARÉCHAL FOCH (MAR-EH-SHAWL FOSHE): A complex hybrid created in France in 1911 and named
after Maréchal Ferdinand Foch, a general in the French army during World War I. Deeply colored, tannic, and
somewhat herbaceous, and well suited to cold climates. Grown today in small amounts in Canada and the
northeastern United States.
◯MARSANNE (MAR-SAHN): The main white grape of the northern Rhône in France. Makes big-bodied wines
and is often blended with the aromatic and elegant grape roussanne, which may be either its parent or its offspring.
It is also grown in the Languedoc-Roussillon, as well as in California.
● MARSELAN (MAR-SE-LAN): A recent cross (1961) of cabernet sauvignon and garnacha/grenache, cultivated
in the Languedoc and the southern Rhône. The name refers to Marseille, the well-known city near the agronomy
institute in Montpellier, where the cross was developed.
◯ MAUZAC (MAO-ZAHK): In the Languedoc-Roussillon, in France, the grape used to make sparkling
Crémant de Limoux.
● MAVRODAPHNE (MAV-RO-DAFF-KNEE): Also spelled mavrodaphni, the name means “black laurel.”
Probably native to Cephalonia (Kefalonia in Greek), one of the Ionian islands of western Greece, or the
Peloponnese peninsula. It is the leading grape in the famous Greek wines mavrodaphne de Patras and mavrodaphne
de Kefalonia, which are long-aged, sweet, fortified red wines made in Patras on the Peloponnese peninsula and in
Cephalonia, the largest of the Ionian islands in western Greece.
● MAVROTRAGANO (MAV-RO-TRAG-AH-NOH): Indigenous to the Greek island of Santorini, mavrotragano
produces wines with high tannin, and berry and spice characteristics. Once almost extinct, it is now experiencing a
renaissance.
● MAVROUDA (MAV-ROO-DAH): The name (also spelled mavroudi or mavroudia) for several unrelated dark-
skinned grape varieties grown all over Greece.
● MAZUELO (MA-ZWAY-LO): Native to northeastern Spain—probably the region of Aragón, mazuelo has
dozens of synonyms in Spain and elsewhere. In Spain, in Rioja, it is known as mazuelo and is used in many Rioja
blends for its acidity, tannin, and earthy flavors. But in Priorat and elsewhere in Spain, it is known as cariñena. In
France, especially in the Languedoc-Roussillon, Provence, and Rhône regions of southern France, it’s known as
carignan. Indeed, today, despite this grape’s Spanish origins, more of it is grown in France. In the United States,
carignan is often spelled carignane.

◯ MELON DE BOURGOGNE (MEL-AWN DE BORE-GOY-NYA): An ancient Burgundian variety, melon
was subsequently banned in Burgundy, but found a centuries-long home in the Loire Valley, where it’s the grape
that makes the light, tart, dry French wine Muscadet, considered the working man’s accompaniment to oysters.
● MENCÍA (MEN-THEE-AH): A spicy grape native to the area around Bierzo, in the province of León, in
northwestern Spain, that is currently undergoing a small revival. Also grown in Portugal’s Dão region, where it is
known as jaen.
● MERLOT: See page 62.
● MISSION (MI-SHEN): The first Vitis vinifera variety planted in California. Originally from Spain, and brought
to California by Franciscan missionaries traveling north from Mexico in the 1700s. Determined in the 1990s to be
the Spanish grape listán prieto. Mission remained the mainstay of the California wine industry until the Gold Rush
of 1848. There are still some 600 acres (242 hectares) of mission planted in California, mostly in the hot San
Joaquin valley. See also Listán prieto.
● MOLINARA (MOLE-IN-ARE-AH): A high-acid red grape probably native to the Veneto. It is not as high in
quality as corvina or rondinella, the grapes it is blended with (albeit in small amounts) to make Italy’s powerful
wine Amarone, as well as for the lighter wines Valpolicella and Bardolino.
● MONASTRELL (MON-AH-STRELL): A widely planted, very late-ripening grape that originated in Valencia,
Spain. Today it is used mostly in the central part of that country, in provinces such as Jumilla, to make powerful,
dark, dense red wines. See Mourvèdre (the French name of the grape), page 63.
◯ MONEMVASIA (MO-NEM-VASE-EE-A): Greek variety found mainly on the Cyclades Islands in the
Aegean, notably Paros, and in the southern Peloponnese Peninsula. Makes both dry and sweet wines. The name is
said to come from the fortified medieval port city Monemvasia, which, thanks to an earthquake in A.D. 375, is now
an island connected to the mainland by one bridge. In Greek moni emvassis means single entrance.
● MONTEPULCIANO (MON-TI-PULL-CHEE-AH-NO): Confusingly, this is not the grape of the Tuscan wine
vino nobile di Montepulciano, which is made from sangiovese. Instead, the grape montepulciano is widespread
throughout central and southern Italy, and is especially well known in Abruzzi, where it makes the good, rustic
montepulciano d’Abruzzo.

◯ MORIO-MUSKAT (MOOR-EE-OH MUS-CAT): A German cross of unknown parentage found mostly in
Germany’s Pfalz and Rheinhessen regions. Makes a somewhat perfumed wine that can often be a bit too much like
cheap perfume.
◯ MOSCATEL (MOSS-CA-TELL): The general name used in Spain and parts of Portugal for both muscat
blanc à petits grains and muscat of Alexandria. In Jerez, moscatel bianco (muscat of Alexandria) is the third most
important grape, after Palomino and Pedro Ximénez, and there, it is made into a sweet, fortified wine that is
sometimes made by the solera system of fractional blending that is used to make Sherry. It is also made into
intriguing dry, aromatic still wines (both alone and as part of a blend) in several other parts of Spain.

◯ MOSCHOFILERO (MOW-SHO-FEE-YER-OH): Highly aromatic Peloponnesian grape that is the source of
the light, fresh Greek Peloponnesian wine Mantineia.
● MOURVÈDRE: See page 63.
◯ MTSVANE KAKHURI (MUTZ-VAH-NEH KAH-KOO-REE): An old variety from southeastern Georgia,
but also grown in Ukraine, Russia, and the Republic of Moldova. Usually just called mtsvane. Used to make dry
and sweet wines, some of which are made in the traditional clay qvevri, a kind of large amphora without handles
that is buried in the ground.
◯ MÜLLER-THURGAU (MOO-LER TER-GAO): Well-known German grape variety that makes rather
neutral-tasting, undistinguished wine in Germany (but very good wine in surrounding countries, such as Italy and
Hungary). Recent DNA typing has established it as a cross between riesling and madeleine royale, a table grape of
unknown parentage. Müller-Thurgau was widely planted after World War II and became the leading grape in
Germany in the 1990s. Today, it has been supplanted by riesling, which makes vastly superior wine.
◯ MUSCADEL (MUS-CA-DELL): South African name for muscat blanc à petits grains. See Muscat, page 63.
See also Muscadelle.
◯ MUSCADELLE (MUS-CA-DELL): Perfumed grape blended in tiny amounts with sémillon and sauvignon
blanc to make some white Bordeaux. It’s more famous, however, in Australia, where it is used to make the famous
Australian fortified wine topaque (formerly known as tokay) in the Rutherglen region of Victoria. It is not the same
variety as any of the varieties called muscat. Confusingly, South African muscadel is a muscat.

◯ MUSCADET (MUS-CA-DAY): The name sometimes used for melon de Bourgogne, the grape that is the
source of the sharp, light, dry French wine Muscadet.
● MUSCARDIN (MUS-CAR-DEN): A relatively rare, fairly neutral grape used in France’s southern Rhône, in
such wines as Châteauneuf-du-Pape and Gigondas.
◯ MUSCAT: See page 63.
◯ MUSKATELLER (MUS-CA-TELLER): Austrian name for muscat blanc à petits grains. See Muscat, page
63. Also known as gelber muskateller.
                                                          N
● NEBBIOLO: See page 64.
● NEGOSKA (NE-GOES-KA): A northern Greek variety used with xynomavro to make the popular, full-bodied
Greek wine Goumenissa.
● NEGRAMOLL (NEG-RA-MOL): An old variety that probably originated in Andalucía, Spain, and from there
was brought to Spain’s Canary Islands, where it still is grown today and where it makes light aromatic reds. It is
better known, as tinta negra mole, on the Portuguese island of Madeira, where it is the leading grape planted and is
used for much of the basic Madeira produced.
● NEGRARA (NE-GRA-RA): A minor blending grape in the powerful Italian wine amarone and the lighter-
bodied Valpolicella. Considered lower in quality than corvina and rondinella, with which it is blended.
● NEGRETTE (NE-GRET): A variety that grows north of Toulouse, in southwestern France, where it is fruity
and simple, and not as popular as the other local variety, tannat.
● NEGROAMARO (NEG-RO A-MAR-OH): Negro (black) and amaro (bitter) tell it all. An appealing, southern
Italian grape with slight bitter espresso-like flavors and yet a soft texture. Widely grown in the Apulia region,
especially in the hot, dry Salento peninsula, the spur of the Italian boot. No parental relationships have yet been
established for this main variety.
● NERELLO CAPPUCCIO (NER-ELLO CA-POO-CHO): Grown on Mt. Etna, in Sicily, and is thought to be
related to sangiovese, much like nerello Mascalese, but produces a lower-quality wine that is mostly used to add
color and alcohol to red blends.
● NERELLO MASCALESE (NER-ELLO MAS-CA-LAY-ZE): Grown on the volcanic slopes of Sicily’s Mt.
Etna and thought to be distantly related to sangiovese. It is often bottled on its own, as well as being blended.
Produces wines with good acid and tannin content.
● NERO D’AVOLA (NER-O DA-VO-LA): This widely planted black (nero) grape was probably named after the
city of Avola, on the Italian island of Sicily. It’s the aristocratic red grape of Sicily, making wines that are
mouthfilling, structured, chocolaty, and often complex. It is sometimes called Calabrese. DNA analysis suggests
there are several clones of nero d’Avola, and possibly several different varieties that fall under the name.

● NERO DI TROIA (NER-O DEE TROY-A): Also known as uva di Troia. Rustic, tannic, productive variety
grown primarily in the Apulia region of Italy, in the province of Bari. The name translates as “black of Troy,” but
DNA analysis shows no relationship to Greek varieties.
◯ NEUBURGER (NOY-BURGER): Austrian grape known to make golden-colored dry wines and some good
sweet wines. A natural cross between roter veltliner and silvaner that probably took place in Austria.
◯ NIAGARA (NIGH-AG-RA): A very pungently aromatic American cross of two Vitis labrusca varieties,
named after Niagara, New York, where it was developed in the 1860s. Still best known in New York State, where it
is the source of off-dry and sweet wines.
● NORTON (NOR-TEN): One of the oldest hybrids cultivated in the United States, having been discovered in
Virginia sometime around 1820. DNA typing suggests it is a natural cross that occurred in the wild of a Vitis
vinifera variety with a Vitis aestivalis variety. Today, it is grown in the Midwest and mid-Atlantic states, and is
especially successful in Missouri and Virginia, where it is the source of some surprisingly good zinfandel-like
wines.
                                                         O
● OSELETA (OH-SEH-LET-TAH): Used in small amounts in some amarone and Valpolicella blends, in
northeastern Italy. Originally thought to be extinct, it was revived by producers in the Veneto in the 1990s.
                                                           P
● PAÍS (PIE-EECE): The name means country in Spanish. A prolific variety in Chile, where it is the source of
common, undistinguished table wine. Originally known as criolla chica, país is the same as California’s mission
grape. In the mid-2000s, DNA typing revealed both país and misson to be the Spanish grape listán prieto, brought
to Mexico, Argentina, and Chile in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries by Spanish conquistadores and
missionaries.

◯ PALOMINO (PAL-OH- ME-NO): More correctly known as Palomino fino and grown in southern and central
Spain, this is the major grape of Spain’s famous fortified wine, Sherry. When just harvested, it has a fairly neutral
character, which is desirable for the solera process of making Sherry.
◯ PARELLADA (PAR-AH-YA-DA): The most refined of the three grapes used to make cava, Spanish sparkling
wine.
◯ PEDERNÃ (PEY-DARE-NYA): One of the minor grapes sometimes included in the blend to make the
Portuguese wine vinho verde. The same grape as arinto.
◯ PEDRO XIMÉNEZ (PEY-DRO HE-MEN-EZ): An Andalusian variety cultivated throughout the south of
Spain. Nicknamed PX, it’s the second most important grape for making Sherry. Aged unblended in a solera, it
makes an unreal, delicious dessert Sherry that has the deep mahogany color and sticky viscosity of molasses.
● PELOURSIN (PELL-OR-ZAN): An ancient French variety native to eastern France and now a minor grape in
the southern Rhône Valley. One of the parents (the other is syrah) of the grape Durif, commonly known in
California as petite sirah.
● PERIQUITA (PEAR-IH-KEY-TA): The name of this heart grape means parakeet. One of the most widely
planted grapes in Portugal, it is particularly successful in the south of the country, but grown as far north as the
Douro. Also known as castelão, periquita is a natural cross of the Portuguese grapes cayetana blanca and
alfrocheiro. Periquita is also the brand name of a popular Portuguese red table wine that is a blend of the grape
periquita with touriga nacional and touriga franca.
◯ PETIT CORBU (PEH-TEET CORE-BOO): An ancient grape grown primarily in the Gascony region of
southwest France and also grown in the Basque regions of France and Spain. Contributes a note of honey to blends.
Sometimes spelled petit courbut.
● PETITE SIRAH/PETITE SYRAH (PE-TEET SEAR-AH): The name is easy to remember, for nothing is
petite about the wines that come from petite sirah. Instead, the “variety” makes a blockbuster, blackish, peppery,
spicy, tannic wine. Most commonly grown in northern California, petite sirah is sometimes not a single variety.
DNA typing indicates that wines labeled petite sirah are most often the Rhône grape Durif (a cross of peloursin and
syrah), but they may also be a field blend of many varieties, including syrah, zinfandel, and several varieties
common to southern France.
◯ PETIT MANSENG (PEH-TEET MAN-SANG): Primarily used in the sweet wine Jurançon, a rare specialty
of southwestern France. Commonly, the grapes are left on the vine until they are shriveled and their sugar is
concentrated, although the noble mold Botrytis cinerea may also take hold. Also known as izakiriot ttipi in Spain’s
Basque region, where it is one of the varieties used to make the tart, dry white Txakolí.
● PETIT VERDOT (PE-TEET VER-DOE): Important, late-ripening Bordeaux grape, traditionally blended in
small amounts with cabernet sauvignon and merlot, for spice, depth, and color. In California, it is sometimes made
into powerful wines on its own. While petit verdot appears to have originated in or near Bordeaux, its parents are
not known.

◯ PICARDAN (PEE-CAR-DAN): One of the minor white grapes sometimes used in the wines of France’s
southern Rhône, especially in Côtes-du-Rhône and white Châteauneuf-du-Pape. On its own, picardan makes
neutral-tasting, fairly uninteresting wine.
◯ PICOLIT (PEE-KO-LEE): Highly regarded, rare grape native to the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region of
northeastern Italy, where it is the source of the prized dessert wine also known as picolit. The name is derived from
the small size of the clusters—piccolo in Italian means “small.”
◯ PICQUEPOUL BLANC (PEEK-POOL BLAHNK): Also spelled picpoul. One of the minor grapes of
southern France, where it is used in the southern Rhône as part of the blend in Côtes-du-Rhône, Tavel, and
Châteauneuf-du-Pape. See also piquepoul noir.

● PIGNOLO (PIG-NYO-LOW): Rare Friulian (northeastern Italian) variety that was almost extinct before being
rescued and actively cultivated in the region since the 1970s. Makes distinctive, structured wines on its own, but is
often used in red Friuli blends.
◯ PINOT BLANC (PEE-NO BLAHNK): Generally makes good, not great, wines reminiscent of modest
versions of chardonnay. The best worldwide come from small producers in northeastern Italy; Alsace, France; and
in Austria (where it can be made into gorgeous sweet wines). In the New World, Oregon shows promise with the
grape. Like pinot gris, pinot blanc is not actually a separate variety; it is an ancient clone (based on a color
mutation) of pinot noir. Known as pinot bianco in Italy.

◯ PINOT GRIS (PEE-NO GREE): See page 65.
● PINOT MEUNIER (PEE-NO MOON-YAY): The word meunier means miller, a reference to the thin layer of
white hairs on the underside of the vine leaves, which gives them a downy, floury appearance. Pinot meunier is a
clone of pinot noir, although in the classic Champagne triumvirate of chardonnay, pinot noir, and pinot meunier, it
is usually presented as a variety in and of itself. The clone is valued for its early ripening, making it less susceptible
to winter frosts, and for its ability to ripen well in soils that have clay in them (as along the Marne river valley of
Champagne). See also Pinot noir, page 66.
● PINOT NOIR: See page 66.
● PINOTAGE (PEE-NO-TAJ): A South African cross, in 1925, of pinot noir and cinsaut (which at the time in
South Africa was called Hermitage). Makes a rustic red wine (opinions vary on its potential quality) often
consumed with South African barbecue.

● PIQUEPOUL NOIR (PEEK-POOL NWAHR): This black clonal mutation of piquepoul is now very rare, but
still allowed as a blending grape in several appellations of the southern Rhône Valley and Languedoc-Roussillon
regions of France.
● PLAVAC MALI (PLA-VATZ MA-LEE): The most highly regarded ancient red grape native to Croatia; a
specialty of the Dalmatian coast, as well as other parts of Eastern Europe. A cross between crljenak kaštelanski
(also known as zinfandel and tribidrag) and dobričić, another Croatian variety. The name refers to the small, blue
grapes that the vines produce; in Croatian, plavo means blue and mali means “small.”
● PRIÉ (PREE-EH): Native to the Valle d’Aosta region of northwest Italy, near Mont Blanc, and cultivated
almost exclusively there. A complex set of family relationships suggests this northern Italian variety is somehow
connected to northern Spain, but the exact genetic footprint is not known.
● PRIMITIVO (PRE-MA-TEE-VOH): The southern Italian twin of Croatia’s tribidrag, where it is more
commonly called crljenak kaštelanski.
◯ PROSECCO (PRO-SEC-OH): Common name for the grape grown especially in the Conegliano area of the
Veneto region of Italy, and used to make the bubbly Italian sparkling wine also known as prosecco. In 2009, the
grape was officially renamed glera to distinguish it from the DOC zone for the wine, called prosecco. The grape is
thought to have originated in the Istrian area of northern Croatia, a short distance from the Italian city of Trieste.
Prosecco wine is the traditional sparkler (along with white peach juice) in the Italian cocktail the Bellini.
                                                         R
◯ RAVAT BLANC (RA-VAHT BLAHNK): See Vignoles.
◯ REBULA (REH-BOO-LAH): See Ribolla gialla.
● REFOSCO (REH-FOSS-CO): The collective name for several distinct varieties grown in the Friuli-Venezia
Giulia region of Italy, and in Slovenia, where it is spelled refosko. The major one—refosco dal peduncolo rosso
(refosco with the red stem)—makes tasty everyday red wines. A more rare variety, refosco del botton, is another
name for tazzelenghe.
● REFOSKO (REH-FOHSK-OH): See Refosco.
◯ RENSKI RIZLING (RENZ-KEE REEZ-LING): Slovenian for riesling; see page 67.
◯ RHODITIS (ROW-DEE-TIS): An old Greek variety with pink berries that has begotten many clones. While
no conclusive DNA analysis is yet available, many scientists think that what is called roditis may actually be field
blends of various white varieties. It is the source of the simple white wine Patras, which is made on the
Peloponnese Peninsula of Greece.
◯ RIBOLLA GIALLA (REE-BO-LA GEE-AH-LA): A very old variety from the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region
of Italy, which makes high-quality, lemony white wines. The same grape as the Slovenian variety rebula.
◯ RIESLANER (REEZ-LAHN-ER): A German cross of riesling and silvaner, which is the source of good zesty
wines, especially in Germany’s Pfalz and Franken regions.
◯ RIESLING: See page 67.
◯ RIESLING ITALICO (REEZ-LING EE-TAL-I-CO): Grown in northern Italy, especially in Lombardy, to
make basic dry whites; not a true riesling but rather the Croatian grape graševina.
◯ RKATSITELI (ARE-CAT-SI-TELL-EE): The most planted grape of the former Soviet Union, and a
specialty of the Republic of Georgia, where the grape originated and is still widely grown. Also well known in
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, and in Eastern Europe. There are even historic plantings in New York State.
Made into fascinating, spicy, floral, dry wines as well as sweet and fortified wines.
◯ ROBOLA (ROW-BO-LA): Grown principally on several Ionian islands of Greece. Makes powerful, lemony
dry wines.
◯ ROLLE (ROLL): Native to Italy, where it is known as vermentino. Grown in southern France, in particular in
the Languedoc-Roussillon and Provence (where it’s used for blending) and on the island of Corsica (where it is the
most important variety).
● RONDINELLA (RON-DIH-NELL-AH): With corvina and molinara, used to make the powerful Italian wine
amarone and the lighter-bodied wines Valpolicella and Bardolina. Corvina, which is a higher-quality grape, is one
of rondinella’s parents; the other is unknown.
● ROSSESE (ROH-SEH-ZEH): The name rossese is used in Liguria, Italy, for several different varieties. The
leading one, rossese di Dolceacqua (used to make the light red wine Dolceacqua), is the same as the Provençal
grape tibouren.
◯ ROTER VELTLINER (ROW-TER VELT-LEANER): Ancient, rather rare Austrian variety that can make
powerful spicy whites (despite its name; roter means red) not unlike grüner veltliner (though the two are not
related). One of the parents of rotgipfler.
◯ ROTGIPFLER (ROT-GIP-FLUR): Austrian variety, the result of a natural cross between roter veltliner and
savagnin. A specialty of the Thermenregion, south of Vienna, where it is often blended with zierfandler.

◯ ROUSSANNE (RUE-SAHN): A variety of France’s northern Rhône, appreciated for its greater elegance in
comparison to its sister marsanne, with which it is often blended and to which it is genetically related, although
scientists aren’t sure which is the parent of the other. Also grown in the Languedoc-Roussillon and in California.
● RUBY CABERNET (RUBY CAB-ER-NAY): A cross of cabernet sauvignon and carignan, created in 1936 by
the famous University of California at Davis scientist Harold Olmo, PhD. Olmo’s intention, to make a grape that
combined cabernet sauvignon’s quality and carignan’s drought tolerance, was not realized. Ruby cabernet does,
however, make good jug wines.

◯ RULÄNDER (RUE-LAHN-DER): See Grauburgunder.
                                                         S
● SAGRANTINO (SA-GRAN-TEE-NO): Native to the Montefalco area of Umbria, Italy, sagrantino is the
delicious, bold-tasting grape used in one of Umbria’s top wines, sagrantino di Montefalco.

◯ ST.-ÉMILION (SANT-EH-MILL-E-YAWN): A name sometimes used in the Cognac region of France for the
grape ugni blanc, also known as trebbiano Toscano. Today, St.-Émilion grapes are no longer grown in the town of
St.-Émilion in Bordeaux, where merlot and cabernet franc are the reigning varieties.
● ST. GEORGE: See Agiorgitiko.
● ST. LAURENT (SAINT LOR-ONT): Probably native to Austria, and grown there to make velvety reds with
lovely cherry flavors. Also grown extensively in the Czech Republic, where it is known as svatovavŕinecké. St.
Laurent’s parents are not known, but it is one of the parents of another Austrian red, zweigelt.
● ST. MACAIRE (SAINT MA-CARE): An obscure Bordeaux variety now virtually extinct in Bordeaux, but
planted in limited amounts in California.
◯ SÄMLING (SAM-LING): Also known as sämling 88, it is a cross of riesling and an unknown grape, and is
grown in small amounts, principally in Austria. In Germany, it is known as scheurebe. Can make very good
eiswein.
● SANGIOVESE: See page 68.
● SAPERAVI (SAH-PER-RAV-EE): A very old Georgian variety whose name means “dye”—a reference to the
dark color of the grape’s skins, which immediately turn their white juice pink. The most widely planted grape in
Georgia today, and widely planted in the former Soviet Union. Makes rich, darkly colored, full-bodied, savory dry
wines. Some producers ferment the wines in the traditional manner, underground in qvevri, large clay vessels that
look like amphorae without handles.
◯ SAUVIGNON BLANC: See page 68.
◯ SAUVIGNON GRIS (SEW-VIN-YAWN GREE): A grayish-pink-skinned genetic mutation of sauvignon
blanc (gris means “gray” in French). Somewhat more floral and less “green” tasting than sauvignon blanc, and less
edgy on the palate. It is grown primarily in Bordeaux and Chile, although there are also experimental plantings in
California.
◯ SAUVIGNON VERT (SEW-VIN-YAWN VERT): A lightly floral, slightly spicy grape that is not related to
sauvignon blanc, but rather is the same as Italy’s friulano, planted in the northeastern Italian region of Friuli-
Venezia Giulia. In the New World, the grape (also known as sauvignonasse) was popular in Chile right up through
the 1980s. Indeed many old-style Chilean wines labeled sauvignon blanc were actually sauvignon vert. Today,
sauvignon vert is rarely planted in Chile—its place having been taken by true sauvignon blanc and sauvignon gris,
though sauvignon vert has much to recommend it.
◯ SAUVIGNONASSE (SEW-VIN-YAWN-AHSS): See Sauvignon vert.
◯ SAVAGNIN (SA-VA-NYEN): An ancient variety indigenous to the area covering northeast France and
southwest Germany. One of the ancestral “founder varieties” that gave rise to scores of others throughout Europe,
including verdelho, grüner veltliner, sauvignon blanc, and chenin blanc. Also known as traminer in Germany and in
Italy’s Trentino-Alto Adige region. The pink-berried clone savagnin rosé is better known as gewürztraminer.
Savagnin has a genetic relationship with pinot noir—either as its progeny or its parent, but geneticists are not sure
which.
◯ SAVATIANO (SA-VA-TEE-ANO): Widely planted in Greece, it is the grape most frequently used to make the
wine retsina.
◯ SCHEUREBE (SHOY-RAY-BA): Germany’s best-kept secret—especially in the Pfalz and Rheinhessen
regions—scheurebe has an unusual spicy/grapefruity/red currant flavor. A cross of riesling and an unknown grape.
● SCHIAVA (SKI-AH-VA): Italian name for a group of different varieties, all of which are grown in the north,
usually near the Alps. The name may come from schiavo, slave in Italian, a reference to the way the vines are often
trellised to limit their vigorous growth. The most widespread schiava is schiava grossa, grown in Trentino-Alto
Adige, where it makes light-colored, fruity wines. The grape is also called vernatsch. In Germany, schiava is known
as trollinger.
● SCHIOPPETTINO (SKI-OH-PE-TEE-NO): Fascinating though fairly rare grape native to northeastern Italy;
a specialty of the region of Friuli-Venezia Giulia, where it makes medium-bodied, spicy, aromatic wines.
◯ SCUPPERNONG (SCUPPER-NONG): The name in Native American Algonquin language means “place
where magnolias grow”—a reference to the area near the mid-Atlantic U.S. island called Roanoke Island, and near
the Atlantic coasts of Virginia and North Carolina, where scuppernong is thought to have originated as one of the
first American wines. It belongs to the native American species Vitis rotundifolia. Around 1607, the Jamestown
colonists are thought to have made wine from scuppernong grapes they found growing in Virginia. By the
nineteenth century, the wine was so popular that North Carolina, where the vine grew rampantly, became the
leading grape producer in the United States.

◯ SÉMILLON: See page 69.
◯ SERCIAL (SIR-SEE-AHL): Esteemed Portuguese grape, today best known for making the lightest, driest
style of Madeira.

◯ SEYVAL BLANC (SAY-VAL BLAHNK): One of the most popular French-American hybrids, originally
developed in France for its disease resistance and ability to ripen early in cold climates, but now outlawed in that
country (as are all hybrids). Still planted in England, Canada, and the eastern United States, particularly in New
York State and Michigan.
◯ SILVANER (SIL-VAHN-ER): Austrian variety, mostly neutral in character, that is a cross of savagnin with
österreichisch weiss, an ancient white variety grown near Vienna. In Germany, silvaner makes a somewhat more
characterful, dry, firm, bold wine, especially in the Franken region. In Alsace, France, silvaner is known as
sylvaner, and some very good wines are made from the grape, although acreage in Alsace is declining.

◯ SIVI PINOT (SEE-VEE PEE-NOH): Slovenian for pinot gris; see page 65.
● SOUSÃO (SUE-SHAOW): Portuguese grape probably native to the Minho, where it is called vinhão and used
as the basis for good red vinho verde. Also used in small amounts in the Douro, as a part of the Port blend, for its
immensely saturated color and for the fact that it retains its acidity well and therefore contributes a sense of
freshness.
● SPANNA (SPAHN-AH): Synonym for nebbiolo in various districts of Piedmont, Italy; see page 333.
● SPÄTBURGUNDER (SHPATE-BRR-GUN-DER): German name for pinot noir; see page 550.
● STAVROTO (STA-VROW-TOE): Native to eastern Greece, mostly grown in the Rapsáni appellation, where it
is a required component (along with xinomavro and krassato) of blends labeled Rapsáni.
◯ SUBIRAT PARENT (SOO-BEE-RAHT PARE-ENT): A minor variety best known in Catalonia, Spain.
While it is sometimes said to be a malvasia, subirat parent is actually the same as the old Spanish variety alarije,
which originated in Extramadura. Occasionally used in cava, Spanish sparkling wine.
◯ SULTANIYE (SOOL-TAHN-EE-AY): A seedless variety, and one of the most wirely planted grape varieties
in the world. The vast majority of it is planted for table grapes and raisins, not for wine (a good thing, since wines
made from it are rather neutral and lack character). Named after the Ottoman (Turkish) sultans, for whom it was
widely grown. Its origin is unclear, but Turkey, Greece, Iran, and Afghanistan have all been suggested. In
California, it is called Thompson seedless.
● SYRAH: See page 70.
◯ SZÜRKEBARÁT (SOOR-KEH-BARAT): Hungarian name for pinot gris; see page 65.
                                                          T
● TANNAT (TAN-AHT): One of the leading grapes in southwest France, particularly used in the wines Madiran
and Irrouléguy. Robust, tannic, and deeply colored. Brought, probably, from the Basque region to Uruguay in the
1870s. Today, it is the main grape of Uruguay, where it makes softer, fleshier wines.

● TAZZELENGHE (TAZ-EH-LEN-GAY): In Italian, the name means “cut the tongue”—a reference to the sharp
acidity of the wine made from this grape. A specialty of Italy’s Friuli-Venezia Giulia region. DNA analysis reveals
it to be the variety also known as refosco del botton.
● TEMPRANILLO: See page 72.
● TERAN (TARE-AHN): See Terrano.
● TEROLDEGO (TARE-OL-DIH-GO): One of the leading red grapes of Trentino-Alto Adige, the northernmost
region in Italy. The grape makes fascinating, highly structured wines with lively blackberry fruit and tar character.
Teroldego is a grandchild of pinot noir and an unknown variety, and itself has spontaneously crossed with an
unknown variety to produce lagrein.
● TERRANO (TARE-AH-NOH): Grown on the Italy-Slovenia border, and in Croatia (where it is known as
teran), it is part of the refosco group. The wines have firm tannins and elegant fruit flavors, and often age well.
◯ TERRANTEZ (TER-AHN-TZSH): Rare Portuguese grape historically grown on the island of Madeira,
where it was once used to make the highly appreciated, rare style of Madeira also known as terrantez. While bottles
of old terrantez Madeira still come up at rare wine auctions, the variety is virtually extinct as a commercial variety.
● TERRET NOIR (TARE-ETTE NWAHR): Grown in southern France, in the Languedoc-Roussillon, Provence,
and in the southern Rhône. Of good but rarely great quality, terret noir is often a minor part of the blend in southern
French appellations such as Fitou, Minervois, Cassis, Côtes-du-Rhône, Gigondas, and Châteauneuf-du-Pape.
◯ THOMPSON SEEDLESS (TOMP-SON SEED-LESS): The California name for the seedless table grape
variety sultaniye, one of the world’s most widely planted varieties, but consumed vastly more as table grapes or
dried for raisins than made into wine. A prolific grower, it was used in California jug wine blends after World War
II.
● TIBOUREN (TIB-OU-REN): A well-known variety all along the French Riviera, and especially along the gulf
of St. Tropez, where it is used primarily to make rosé wines. The same as rossesse di Dolceacqua, in Liguria, across
the Italian border.
● TINTA BARROCA (TIN-TAH BAR-OCA): The name means “black baroque.” Native to the Douro region of
northern Portugal, where it is one of the grapes commonly used as part of the blend to make Port, as well as in dry
table wines.
● TINTA DEL PAÍS (TIN-TAH DEL PIE-EESE): A group of clones of tempranillo grown in Spain in Ribera del
Duero; see Tempranillo, page 72.
● TINTA DEL TORO (TIN-TAH DEL TOR-OH): A group of clones of tempranillo grown in Spain’s Toro
region; see Tempranillo, page 72.
● TINTA FRANCISCA (TIN-TAH FRAN-CEASE-KA): Native to the Duoro region of Portugal, where its name
means “French black,” although DNA analysis reveals the grape has no links with France. Used as one of the minor
grapes in the blends to make Port.
● TINTA NEGRA MOLE (TIN-TAH NEG-RA MOLE-AY): Most often used on the Portuguese island of
Madeira for basic Madeiras of modest quality. The grape is Spanish in origin and its more proper name is
negramoll.
● TINTA RORIZ (TIN-TAH RO-REEZ): Spanish grape also known as tempranillo. One of the grapes
commonly used as part of the blend to make Port, as well as in the dry table wines of Portugal’s Douro region. See
Tempranillo, page 72.
● TINTO CÃO (TIN-TOE COW): The name means “red dog,” but it’s not clear why a grape would be so named.
An old Portuguese variety native to the Douro and Dão regions, commonly used as part of the blend to make Port,
as well as in the dry table wines of those regions.

● TINTO FINO (TIN-TOE FEE-NO): A group of clones of tempranillo grown in Spain’s Ribera del Duero
region; see Tempranillo, page 72.
◯ TOCAI FRIULANO (TOE-KIGH FREE-OO-LAN-OH): See Friulano.
◯ TORRONTÉS (TORE-ON-TEZ): A specialty of Argentina, where it can make beautifully aromatic, slightly
viscous dry wines that are drunk as aperitifs. Yet torrontés is not a single variety, but three distinctly different ones
all indigenous to Argentina: torrontés Mendocino (not highly thought of); torrontés Sanjuanino (also unexceptional,
planted mostly in the province of San Juan); and torrontés Riojana (the most aromatic and highest-quality torrontés,
often grown in the high-elevation vineyards of the province of Salta). DNA typing suggests that torrontés Riojana is
a white-skinned natural cross of muscat of Alexandria and the red grape mission (listán prieto), both of which had
been brought to the Americas in the sixteenth century by Spanish missionaries and conquistadores. In Spain and
Portugal, the name torrontés is used for several other distinctly different varieties, causing complete confusion.
● TOURIGA FRANCA (TORE-EE-GAH FRANK-AH): High-quality variety native to the Duoro region of
Portugal, even though the word franca might seem to imply it came from France. Used as one of the leading grapes
in the blend to make Port, it has somewhat more finesse and a more refined aroma than touriga nacional, which is
one of its parents. The other is a Portuguese grape called marufo. Touriga franca is also used in the dry table wines
of Portugal’s Douro region.
● TOURIGA NACIONAL (TORE-EE-GAH NA-SEE-ON-AHL): Probably native to Portugal’s Dão region, but
today widely known as the leading powerhouse grape in many of the blends that make Port. The grape has many
attributes, including richness, depth, a commanding tannic structure, good deep coloring, and good aromas. Also
used in the dry wines of the Douro.
◯ TRAJADURA (TRA-JAH-DOO-RAH): Probably native to northern Portugal, and still grown in the Douro
and Minho and used as part of the blend for vinho verde, the grape was brought across the border into Spain. Today
it is more famous as one of the grapes (known as treixadura) grown in Galicia, Spain, where it’s used in the wine
regions of Ribiero and Rías Baixas. Makes dry, fresh whites with a slightly exotic character. Sometimes blended in
small amounts (along with loureira), into albariño.
◯ TRAMINER (TRAM-I-NER): Also known as savagnin, one of the “founder varieties” that led to dozens of
others. In the northern Italian region of Trentino-Alto Adige, a special clone of traminer—traminer aromatico—is
the source of delicious, exotically aromatic wines. It is also grown in Austria and other parts of eastern Europe. In
France, savagnin rosé—the pink-berried clone of savagnin (aka traminer)—is better known as gewürztraminer.
◯ TREBBIANO (TREB-EE-AHN-OH): The name given to a whole group of different varieties that share the
traits of large clusters and mostly vigorous growth. Varieties called trebbiano this or trebbiano that are among the
most prolific vines in the world, yielding millions of gallons of neutral, bland wine yearly. Grown principally in
Italy (where it is listed as one of the permissible grapes in more than eighty DOCs). There is a trebbiano in Abruzzi,
a trebbiano in Lazio, a trebbiano in Emilia-Romagna, a trebbiano in Umbria, and a trebbiano in Tuscany—and
genetically, they are all different varieties. (In Italy, so-called trebbiano is also part of the blend that makes up the
popular wine Soave, though that trebbiano is actually the better-quality grape verdicchio bianco.) In France,
trebbiano Toscano is also known as ugni blanc, and the grape is used in distillation to make both Cognac and
Armagnac. Trebbiano Modenese is the main grape in the top balsamic vinegars of Emilia-Romagna.
◯ TREIXADURA (TRAY-SHA-DUR-AH): See Trajadura.
● TREPAT (TRAY-PAHT): Native to Catalonia, in northeast Spain. Mostly used for making rosé cavas.
● TRINCADEIRA PRETA (TRIN-KA-DARE-RAH PRAY-TA): A darkly colored grape that probably
originated in central Portugal and is now grown all over southern Portugal, where it makes rustic wines. Sometimes
known by the synonym tinta amarela, “black yellow.”
● TROLLINGER (TRAWL-IN-JER): Common German variety making mostly undistinguished wines, especially
in the Württemberg area. Known in its homeland of northern Italy as schiava.
                                                         U
◯ UGNI BLANC (OO-KNEE BLAHNK): One of the leading grapes of France in terms of production, it is the
same as the variety known in Italy as trebbiano Toscano. Makes a thin, neutral-tasting wine that is the basis for
Cognac, and is one of the grapes used to make Armagnac. Also known as St.-Émilion.
                                                           V
● VACCARÈSE (VACK-ARE-EZ): One of the common, if minor, red grapes in France’s southern Rhône Valley.
Sometimes used in Châteauneuf-du-Pape. Also known as brun argenté.

● VALDIGUIÉ (VAL-DIH-GAY): Southwestern French variety, now virtually extinct there, but growing in tiny
amounts in California, where, in the past, it was the source of some wines known confusingly as Napa gamay.
◯ VERDEJO (VER-DAY-HO): Grown in (and probably native to) the north-central Spanish province of Rueda.
Makes one of Spain’s top dry whites, popular for its bay laurel and bitter almond flavors. Verdejo (from verde,
green in Spanish) can also show a slightly piquant green character in the manner of sauvignon blanc. Indeed, some
Rueda wineries blend the two grapes with successful results.
◯ VERDELHO (VER-DEL-YO): The most planted white grape on the Portuguese island of Madeira, where the
grape probably originated. The name is used on the label to indicate a medium-dry, nutty style of Madeira, which
falls between the styles sercial and bual. Verdelho is also grown in Australia. It is not the same as the Italian grape
verdello.
◯ VERDELLO (VER-DEL-OH): One of the minor blending grapes in the Italian wine Orvieto. Despite its
virtually identical-sounding name, it is not the same as verdelho, a key grape in making a medium-dry style of
Madeira.
◯ VERDICCHIO BIANCO (VER-DICK-EE-O BEE-AHN-CO): Usually simply known as verdicchio.
Cultivated principally in central Italy, where it’s usually made into simple, clean white wines in the region known as
the Marche. But in the top sites and at low yields, it can make a racy, bold, crisp wine with more personality. This is
the grape used in the Veneto, with garganega, to make the best Soaves (although there, it is confusingly called
trebbiano di Soave).
◯ VERDUZZO (VER-DOOTS-OH): More accurately verduzzo Friulano, it is grown in northeastern Italy,
primarily in Friuli-Venezia Giulia, where it makes both dry and deliciously honeyed sweet wines. The most famous
of the latter is verduzzo di Ramandolo.
◯ VERMENTINO (VER-MEN-TEEN-OH): Well known along the Italian Riviera, where it is the source of
dry, floral white wines considered indispensable partners for Ligurian fish soups. Also grown on the Italian island
of Sardinia and the French island of Corsica, where it’s sometimes called malvoisie. Grown in southern France,
vermentino is often known as rolle.
◯ VERNACCIA (VER-NAHT-CHA): Lively light, slightly bitter-tasting Italian wine grape grown around the
touristic Tuscan hilltop town of San Gimignano. Vernaccia di San Gimignano was the first Italian wine to be
awarded, in 1966, Denominazione di Origine Controllata (DOC) status. The grape has a long history in Italy and
was praised in the fourteenth-century poem, The Divine Comedy—The Vision of Paradise, Purgatory, and Hell by
Dante Alighieri. Italy’s other famous vernaccia—vernaccia di Oristano, grown on the island of Sardinia—is a
completely different variety and is used to make Sherry-like wines.
◯ VESPAIOLA (VES-PIE-OH-LA): Native grape of the Veneto region of Italy, where it is the source primarily
of honeyed sweet wines.
◯ VIDAL (VEE-DAHL): French-American hybrid created in France in the 1930s by Jean-Louis Vidal, who was
hoping to invent a hearty variety that could be used in making Cognac. Vidal’s parents are trebbiano Toscano (ugni
blanc) and rayon d’or, itself a hybrid. Now it is grown primarily in Virginia, New York State, and Canada. In the
latter two places, it is made not only into dry wines but also into some terrific eisweins. Also known as Vidal blanc.
◯ VIDIANO (VID-EE-AH-NOH): A Greek variety that almost became extinct in the twentieth century, but is
now seeing a revival on the island of Crete.
◯ VIGNOLES (VEEN-YOLE): A French-American hybrid also known as Ravat 51. The biggest plantings in the
United States are in Missouri, where it is used to make both dry and sweet wines.
● VINHÃO (VEEN-YOW): Along with azal tinto, a high-acid Portuguese variety used in the rare red versions of
vinho verde.
◯ VIOGNIER: See page 73.
◯ VIOSINHO (VEE-OH-ZEEN-YO): A relatively old variety native to the Douro Valley of Portugal. One of
the grapes used in white Port and in the dry table wines of the Douro Valley region.
◯ VITOVSKA (VEE-TOVE-SKAH): Grown in the Isonzo and Carso regions of eastern Friuli-Venezia Giulia
and across the border in the Carso/Kras region of Slovenia. Makes fascinating, fleshy dry white wines with elegant,
floral, herbal, and fruit flavors. A surprising natural cross of Tuscany’s malvasia bianca lunga and the grape variety
glera, which is used to make Prosecco.
◯ VIURA (VYOUR-A): The leading white variety in Spain’s Rioja region, where it is the source of simple, dry
whites. In the Penedès region, where it’s used to make Spanish sparkling wine (cava), it’s known as macabeo. A far
smaller amount is grown in France, in the Languedoc-Roussillon, where it is known as maccabeu.
                                                         W
◯ WEISSBURGUNDER (VICE-BRR-GUN-DER): In Germany and Austria, the name for pinot blanc; see
page 91.

◯ WELSCHRIESLING (WELSH REEZ-LING): The name Austrians use for the grape graševina, which is
thought to have originated in Croatia (where it is the leading white grape variety). Used in Austria, especially in
Burgenland, to make delicious late-harvest, botrytized wines. Also widely grown in Slovenia (laški rizling) and in
Hungary (olasz rizling). In Italy it’s known as riesling italico and makes dry, light wines in Lombardy. Despite the
word riesling in its names, the grape is not directly related to riesling genetically.
                                                         X
◯ XAREL-LO (SHA-REL-OH): Highly regarded Catalan grape grown in the Penedès for cava, Spanish
sparkling wine. Used for cava, it contributes body, flavor, and structure. Also made into good, bold-flavored still
table wine in the Penedès.

● XINOMAVRO (ZEE-NO-MAV-RO): Sometimes spelled xynomavro. From xyno, acid, and mavro, black.
Greece’s most intense, well-respected red grape, it probably originated near the Náoussa region, in northern Greece,
and is still used to make the wine called Náoussa, one of the best Greek reds. Also used in blends to make many
other impressive Greek wines, including Gouménissa and Rapsáni.
                                                           Z
● ŽAMETOVKA (ZAH-MEH-TOV-KAH): An ancient Slovenian variety used as part of the blend in the crisp,
pale-red Slovenian wine called cviček. Known worldwide for a different reason—namely, that the presumed oldest
vine in the world, a 450-year-old vine in the Slovenian town of Maribor, is Žametovka. The vine’s nickname is,
logically enough, stara trta, Slovenian for “old grapevine.”

◯ ZÉTA (ZEH-TAH): One of the four recommended varieties in the Hungarian sweet wine Tokaji aszú. It ripens
early and is highly susceptible to botrytis. Zéta was called oremus until 1999.
◯ ZIBIBBO (ZEE-BEE-BOH): The name, on the island of Sicily, for the ancient variety muscat of Alexandria,
and the source of several famous Sicilian dessert wines.
◯ ZIERFANDLER (ZEER-FAND-LER): An Austrian variety with powerful orange/spice flavors and
considerable body weight. It is blended with rotgipfler to make a powerful, spicy white that is a specialty of
Austria’s Thermenregion.
● ZINFANDEL: See page 74.
● ZWEIGELT (ZVEYE-GELT): An Austrian cross of blaufränkisch and St. Laurent made in 1922 by an Austrian
researcher named Fritz Zweigelt. It is now one of the most widely planted red grapes in Austria, and is the source of
grapey, fruity, purple/red wines in that country.




       Scientific research suggests that the more you know about flavor, the more intense all flavors become.
SENSUAL GEOGRAPHY: TASTING WINE LIKE A
PROFESSIONAL

I think of this chapter as an exploration of sensual geography. (For that evocative term, I
thank super-chef Mark Miller, who first mentioned it to me in the mid-2000s.) We’ve
already addressed what to look for in wine; in this section, we’ll deal with how to do that.
   To begin, suppose you were asked to write a ten-word description of a wine you drank
three nights ago. Could you? Unfortunately, it is possible (easy, in fact) to go for years
drinking wine without tasting it in a way that helps you understand and remember it. Most
of us—even those of us who are committed food and wine lovers—don’t really taste with
conscious intent, nor do we take time to concentrate on what we smell. Tasting and
smelling are often virtually mindless tasks. Yet, without sensory focus and without a
systematic method of smelling and tasting, it’s just about impossible to develop a taste
memory and, ultimately, impossible to understand anything significant about wine.
   Most experts did not begin to develop sensory focus as soon as they started drinking
wine. Years of drinking wine—however enjoyable—do not automatically lead to an
increase in knowledge, or gratification. To gain expertise and—even more significantly—
to heighten the pleasure and impact of what you drink, you must learn to be a deliberate
taster. Moreover, wine expertise takes (remember those piano lessons?) practice.




                  Guests compare wines at one of my seminars at the Napa Valley Reserve.

   How much practice? Here I have to thank my fellow wine writer Matt Kramer, who
reveals the research of cognitive psychologist Daniel Levitin, who runs the Laboratory for
Music Perception, Cognition and Expertise at McGill University in Montreal, Canada.
According to Levitin, it takes a minimum of ten thousand hours of practice (equivalent to
three hours a day for ten years) to achieve the level of mastery associated with being a
world-class expert—in anything. So no matter if you’re a concert pianist, a gymnast, a
poker player, or someone who really knows wine, ten thousand hours appears to be the
magic number. As it turns out, the brain learns through assimilation and consolidation in
neural tissues. Levitin’s work firmly suggests that the more experiences you have with
something, the stronger the learning becomes. But there’s one critical qualifier. You can’t
just practice something—you have to actually care about what you practice. The research
suggests that the more emotional weight you bring to your practice, the more effective it
will be.

      Of the one million genes in the human genome, thirty thousand are solely
      dedicated to encoding smells.

   So if you’re charged up, here we go. In this chapter, we’ll explore the six critical steps
pros go through when trying to determine the personality of a wine:
1 ASSESS THE AROMA
2 GAUGE THE BODY WEIGHT
3 FEEL THE TEXTURE
4 CONSIDER THE TASTE
5 FOCUS ON THE FINISH
6 CONFIRM THE COLOR

   One last thought before we get started: Professional tasters usually spend a second
getting mentally prepared before they taste. (Okay, maybe not when they’re drinking some
quaffer in a beachside café in Hawaii… but short of those kinds of experiences.) So,
before you begin, remind yourself what you’re looking for in any wine. And what are you
looking for? It’s all in The Nine Attributes of Greatness (page 4).
                        ASSESSING THE AROMA

At the turn of the twentieth century, only a handful of elements in wine were known.
Today, more than thirteen hundred volatile (smellable) compounds have been identified in
alcoholic beverages. In wine, the perception of these aromas is exceedingly complex.
Wine aromas are more than the sum of their parts. It’s the interactions between them that
count. Aromatically, wine is more like a symphony than a series of instruments being
played at the same time.
   Moreover, as sensory scientists point out, the genes that encode for olfaction are the
largest group of genes in the body. Of the one million genes in the human genome, thirty
thousand are solely dedicated to encoding smells. That’s a staggering number. Every bit of
evidence we have suggests that smelling a wine is critical to tasting it.
   What many wine drinkers may not realize is that there are two centers of olfaction.
(Humans are thought to be the only creatures to possess two sensory locations for the
perception of smell.) The first, obviously, is the nose. Smelling via the nose is what
scientists refer to as orthonasal olfaction. But olfaction also happens at the back of the
mouth—or, as it is technically called, retronasal olfaction. When wine is mixed with your
saliva and warmed, volatile compounds in the wine are released and waft back through the
retronasal passage at the back of your mouth and up to the cavity behind the bridge of
your nose. There, they are registered by receptor nerve cells, five million of which flash
information to the olfactory bulb of the brain. These cells, stimulated by everything you
breathe in and out, are the most exposed nerves in the body.

      “As soon as I attempt to distinguish the share of any one sense from that of
      the others, I inevitably sever the full participation of my sensing body from
      the sensuous terrain. Many indigenous peoples construe awareness, or
      “mind,” not as a power that resides inside their heads, but rather as a quality
      that they themselves are inside of along with the other animals and plants, the
      mountains, and the clouds.”
                                                              — DAVID ABRAM,
                                                           The Spell of the Sensuous

   Amazingly enough, the two centers of olfaction do not appear to do the same job. Some
molecules may be smelled via the nose, while others may only be smelled retronasally,
giving you an oblique sense that you just “tasted” something.
   What is especially remarkable is the intensity with which smell can be registered. Dr.
Marian W. Baldy, PhD, writing in the American Wine Society Journal (“How the Nose
Knows”), says, “The sensitivity of our sense of smell for some molecules is astonishing.
We can detect the off-odor of hydrogen sulfide in concentrations of three parts per billion
—the equivalent of locating a particular family of three in China—and even smaller
amounts—one to five parts per trillion—of the compound pyrazine which accounts for the
bell pepper aroma in cabernet sauvignon. This is like sniffing out a one-cent error in your
ten billion dollar checking account.”
                                      WINE CONUNDRUM #1
           Sensory scientists have always suspected that the order in which you taste wines
           affects your judgment of them. In 2009, Canadian research confirmed the idea. As
           reported in the journal Psychological Science, Antonia Mantonakis, PhD, of Brock
           University in Ontario, Canada, and her colleagues had volunteers taste two, three, four,
           or five wines whose identities had been hidden and select their favorite. Some
           volunteers were novices and others were wine professionals. Unbeknownst to the
           participants, all of the wine samples were identical. Every group of volunteers preferred
           wine #1 over wines #2 and #3. However, among wine experts in the study who tried
           four or five samples, there was also a “recency effect”—that is, wine #5 was preferred
           over #4 and #3. Dr. Mantonakis believes that her study suggests that connoisseurs may
           compare wines in such a way that each new wine has a chance to beat the current
           favorite (setting up the possibility of selecting the last sample). Novice wine drinkers, on
           the other hand, get overwhelmed with choices early on, and feel happy sticking by wine
           #1.




It helps to have good “equipment” when smelling a wine. This includes a generous glass and a big… well, let’s say, the
                                                  right anatomy.

   Alas, depending on the compound, the sensitivity to smell is also highly individual.
Take, for example, the roselike aroma in gewürztraminer. In a group of eight to ten people,
there is greater than a ten thousand-fold difference in sensitivity between the most
sensitive and least sensitive sniffers. That means that there would need to be ten thousand
times more of this compound in the wine for the least sensitive person to smell it
compared to the most sensitive person.
   Aroma is also highly dependent on temperature. A good example: Warm garlic smells
more garlicky than cold garlic. While some wines should be served cool to accentuate
their acidity, it’s also true that a wine can be chilled to the point that it appears to have no
aroma at all.
      “I do not like broccoli. And I haven’t liked it since I was a little kid and my
      mother made me eat it. And I’m President of the United States, and I’m not
      going to eat any more broccoli.”
                         — FORMER U.S. PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W. BUSH,
                    relaying evidence that the perception of taste is highly individual

   In the end, if you do not smell a wine, or simply take a brief cursory whiff, very little
information goes to the brain and, not surprisingly, you have trouble deciding what the
wine “tastes” like.
   How do you smell correctly? Start by swirling the wine in the glass. Swirling aerates
wine, helping to volatilize the aromas. The best way to do this is to rest the glass on a table
and, holding it by the stem, rapidly move it as if you were drawing small circles. (All
wines—whites, reds, and rosés—should be swirled.)
   As for actually sniffing the wine, nothing is achieved by holding your nose 2 inches
above the glass and taking a polite whiff. You must get your nose (a big one is an asset)
into the glass near the liquid. Then take a series of short, quick sniffs.
   Why not one long inhale? Imagine putting a grilled steak at one end of the room, and
tying up a dog at the other. The dog wouldn’t take one long deep breath. Instead, its nose
would virtually vibrate as it figured out what that aroma meant. Sniffing, the corollary to
swirling, creates tiny air currents in the nose that carry aroma molecules up to the nerve
receptors, and ultimately to the brain for interpretation.
   But beware of what I call the “Macy’s effect.” As anyone who has stood in the
cosmetic section of a department store knows, the perfumed aromas are almost
overwhelmingly strong—initially. Within seconds, however, you smell nothing. That’s
because the nose fatigues amazingly quickly. The moral of the story for a wine taster:
Don’t acclimate your nose by keeping it in the glass for a long time. Put your nose into the
glass only when you’re absolutely ready to concentrate, and then try to put names to the
aromas. This is harder than it sounds. Although the nose “knows” and can distinguish
thousands of smells, most people, when presented with many aromas at once, can actually
name only a handful. Scientists hypothesize that smell is elusive because it is the most
primitive of the senses. Having evolved millions of years ago as a survival mechanism for
guiding eating and sexual behavior, smell is not easily grasped by the verbal-semantic
parts of the brain.
   If you give someone a list of multiple choices, however, their ability to name aromas
improves dramatically. Again, there’s a wine lesson in this. Rather than tasting a wine and
then trying to think of what it smells like, run lists of possibilities (lemons? apple pie?
cowboy boots?) through your mind. By suggesting ideas to yourself, you’ll often have an
easier time hitting upon the aroma you’re searching for.
                                                    UMAMI
 The fifth taste—in addition to sweet, sour, salty, and bitter—is umami (oo-MA-mee), a word that literally
 translates as “deliciousness” in Japanese. Discovered in 1908 by Japanese scientist Kikunae Ikeda,
 umami is based on the presence of glutamates, also known as glutamic acid, the most abundant type of
 amino acid in certain foods and, as such, indicators of protein. In 2000, University of Miami researchers
 found receptors in our taste buds designed to receive the umami compounds, and named the specific
 receptors T1R1 and T1R3 in 2009. With that discovery, umami became the fifth official taste. Since then,
 further research has revealed that umami exists in several forms. For example, as a simple compound,
 umami is present in foods such as blue cheese, tomatoes, and fermented soy products like soy sauce.
 But it is also present in a more complex, or what scientists call “synergizing” form, in foods like
 mushrooms, truffles, and seaweed. Umami is also synergized in food by aging, fermenting, or long, slow
 cooking. When the two types are combined, the experience is exponentially more satisfying—the so-
 called umami “yum factor.”
   Although amino acids are present in grapes, it’s not clear if glutamates are powerfully at work in wine.
 (Some research suggests that glutamates in wine are created by winemaking techniques such as sur lie
 aging, or leaving wine in contact with the decomposed yeast cells after fermentation.) Of course, from an
 empirical standpoint, what wine drinker doesn’t instinctively recognize the yum factor in wines that are
 well made?




                   It’s all in the wrist. A sommelier pours wine for a guest in the Priorat, Spain.

   Finally, the smell of a wine is today often referred to as its aroma, bouquet, or a
combination of the two, the wine’s so-called “nose” (an old Britishism). Technically,
however, aroma and bouquet are completely different. Aroma is used to describe smells
associated with a young wine. A young merlot, for example, can have a cherry aroma.
Bouquet, on the other hand, describes the smell of a wine that has been aged for a
considerable period of time, and thus all of the early smells have evolved and coalesced.
Bouquets (unlike aromas) are almost impossible to describe. Which is why, when it comes
to old wine, you’ll often read a comment like “phenomenal bouquet,” but no list of
specific adjectives.
                                           TASTEVINS
Silver, shallow-sided tastevins (tasting cups) were invented possibly as far back as the fifteenth century,
for tasting in dark cellars. The cups are more portable and less fragile than glass would be. More
important, they have circular indentations in their sides that reflect candlelight across the metal base of
the cup and make it possible to determine, in a dark cellar, the clarity of a wine just drawn from the
barrel.
                    GAUGING THE BODY WEIGHT

The term body is used to describe the weight of a wine on your palate. A wine’s body is
described as light, medium, full, or some permutation in between. How do you decide?
Imagine the relative weights of skim milk, whole milk, and half-and-half in your mouth. A
light-bodied wine, like skim milk, sits lightly on the palate. A medium-bodied wine has
more weight, like whole milk. A full-bodied wine seems heavier still, like half-and-half.
   Body is often poorly understood and misconstrued. For example, body tells you
nothing about the quality of a wine or the intensity of its flavors or how long the finish
will be. Think about great sorbet. It’s very light in body, but the quality, flavor intensity,
and sustained impact of its taste can be riveting.
   So where does body come from, and why is it important?
   Body comes primarily from alcohol. Low-alcohol wines have a light body. High-
alcohol wines have a full body. Alcohol, in turn, comes from sugar, or essentially, from the
sun. (See Alcohol, page 10.)
   Thus, a wine’s body can tip you off to where the wine comes from. Here’s how it
works: Say you taste a wine and you decide it has a full body (it has the weight of half-
and-half). You could then say to yourself: Aha, this wine must have a lot of alcohol. A lot
of alcohol, in turn, means that there must have been a lot of sugar in the fermentation tank
for the yeasts to eat (and convert to alcohol). A lot of sugar in the tank means those grapes
must have gotten quite ripe. Very ripe grapes means that the grapes must have grown in a
very warm place. Therefore, this full-bodied wine probably came from some place that’s
relatively warm, like Australia or California. It could not have come from Austria,
Burgundy, Germany, or any other place that’s very cool.
                          THE MYSTERY OF MINERALITY
The word minerality is used to describe all sorts of different wines, from Sancerre to Chianti, yet
curiously, there is no agreement among the world’s wine-makers and scientists about what minerality is,
how it is perceived, where it comes from, or even whether it exists.
   Metaphorically, the word is often said to describe wines that smell and/or taste of crushed minerals,
stones, wet stones, or even ocean water. For many wine professionals, however, a minerally wine is not
only a wine with stony/minerally aromas and flavors; it’s also a wine that’s remarkable for its relative
absence of fruit aromas and flavors. For example, the greatest French Chablis and Austrian rieslings (to
name two types of wines often said to be minerally) do not exude significant fruitiness.
   Apart from aroma and flavor, however, the term minerally is also often used to describe wines that
carry a distinct tactile sensation (that is, they stimulate the trigeminal nerve). And while some tasters
associate this feeling with acidity, there is general agreement that the mouthfeel of minerality is not quite
the same as the mouthfeel of acidity. The two can be easily confused, however, because sometimes
minerality and acidity are found together in the same wine. This is the case with many white Burgundies,
for example. Yet there are also notable examples of low-acid wines that possess distinct minerality—
wines from Châteauneuf-du-Pape, for example, or tempranillos from central Spain.
    In Europe, minerality in wine is often explained as the result of certain soils, especially limestone. In
this view, the roots take up minerals from the ground, and these are then expressed as aromas and
flavors in the wine. But, as logical as this idea seems, many geologists take issue with it. The problem is
that minerals in rocks and soils—geological minerals—are intricate, complex compounds that are not
easily broken down to yield their constituent elements. And even if a geological mineral were to
decompose, thus freeing its component elements, there’s no guarantee these elements could be
absorbed by the vine’s roots. Vinification adds to the already multipart problem. Yeasts eat various
inorganic compounds in order to ferment sugars into alcohol. Processes such as fining, filtering, and
aging add and subtract other compounds. In the end, the inorganic chemical profile of the matured wine
is virtually unrelated to the geological minerals in the vineyard. And then there’s the final icing on the
scientific cake: Most inorganic elements occur in amounts measured in mere hundreds of milligrams per
liter—which is to say, amounts that are not detectable by analytics and theoretically not tasteable.
    None of this, of course, sways wine tasters for whom minerality is one of wine’s assets, no matter how
difficult it may be to explain.
   I have shared with two sensory scientists, from Cornell and Yale universities, my own theory about
minerally wines, both white and red. Here it is: Minerally wines—whatever they are and wherever they
come from—activate the salt receptor taste buds. That is, they are picked up on the palate as salt is. As
such, minerally wines magnify other flavors and make them more lively; they make them “jump.” So,
even though there’s never any actual salt in any wine, minerally wines enhance the foods around them
by acting as the “salt” in a meal equation. The scientists heard me out. Their conclusion? Said one of
them: “I think you’re on to something.”


     “To know is to be able to name.”
                                                                     — ÉMILE PEYNAUD,
                                                            Le Goût du Vin (The Taste of Wine)
                            FEELING THE TEXTURE

Closely related to body is texture, sometimes called mouthfeel. A wine’s texture is the
tactile impression it has in your mouth. This impression is the result of stimulation of the
trigeminal nerve. (The largest of the cranial nerves, the trigeminal nerve is responsible for
sensations in the face and mouth.) Fabrics are often used as metaphors for texture or
mouthfeel. A wine can be as soft as flannel (an Australian shiraz, for example), as
seamlessly smooth as silk (a pinot noir), or as coarse and scratchy as wool (some southern
French reds feel this way). It can also feel syrupy, gritty, crackling crisp, or have any of
dozens of other textures. In order to assess a wine’s texture, you must roll it around in your
mouth and feel it. And what’s causing a wine’s texture in the first place? Acidity, tannin,
alcohol, ripeness, and sweetness, to name the major influencers.
   Texture is probably the least talked-about dimension of wine, but I’d argue that, as with
food, it’s one of the key characteristics in determining preferences. Does anyone think that
the texture of, say, steak is beside the point? That it’s only the flavor of the steak that
counts? Similarly, it’s rarely just the lightly herbal, minerally flavors of Sancerre that
someone loves, it’s also Sancerre’s spring-loaded snap of crispness.

                       HOW FAST ARE YOUR TASTEBUDS?
         The human body can taste faster than it can see, touch, or hear. According to Dr.
         Hildegarde Heymann, professor and enologist in the Department of Viticulture and
         Enology at the University of California at Davis, taste perception is swift because the
         tongue and mouth (assisted by the nose) are the body’s primary defenses against
         poison. Here’s how fast perception occurs after initial stimulation, as measured in
         thousandths of a second, for our four main senses:
         TASTE: 1.5–4.0 milliseconds
         TOUCH: 2.4–8.9 milliseconds
         HEARING: 13–22 milliseconds
         VISION: 13–45 milliseconds
                    CONSIDERING THE TASTES

Taste—along with aroma, appearance, and mouthfeel—make up what we call the flavor of
a wine (or the flavor of a food) as perceived by the tongue. The world of taste is
commonly described as encompassing five—possibly six—basic characteristics:
sweetness, sourness, saltiness, bitterness, savoriness (umami), and possibly heartiness
(kokumi). Note that although certain wines can seem to taste salty, actual salt—sodium
chloride—is never found in wine.
     TASTE BUDS AND THE TOTALLY WRONG “TONGUE MAP”
 Taste buds were first detected in the nineteenth century by two German scientists, Georg Meissner and
 Rudolf Wagner. We now know that these buds—which are shaped like onions—each contain between
 fifty and one hundred taste cells. The top of each taste bud has an opening called a taste pore. When we
 taste something, it’s because chemical stimuli from that food have dissolved in our saliva and then come
 into contact with the taste cells by slipping through the taste pores. From there, the stimuli travel via
 cranial nerves to the medulla and then the thalamus and hypothalamus centers of the brain, where flavor
 is perceived. Taste buds, incidentally, can be found not only on the tongue, but on the soft palate,
 pharynx, larynx, and epiglottis as well.
    The discovery of taste buds paved the way for the next step in taste research: determining the
 mechanisms by which taste cells carry out their work. From the 1940s through the 1970s, virtually every
 basic biology textbook—and certainly every wine book—perpetuated the myth that taste buds were
 grouped in the mouth according to specialty. Correspondingly, the tongue was diagrammed into separate
 areas where certain tastes were registered: sweetness at the tip; sourness on the sides, and bitterness
 at the back of the mouth.
   In the 1980s and 1990s, however, research at Yale University, Monell Chemical Senses Center, in
 Philadelphia, and the University of Connecticut, and elsewhere demonstrated that the “tongue map”
 explanation of how we taste was, in fact, totally wrong. As it turns out, the map was a misinterpretation
 and mistranslation of research conducted in Germany at the turn of the twentieth century.
    Today, leading taste researchers, such as Dr. Linda Bartoshuk of Yale University School of Medicine,
 believe that taste buds are not grouped according to specialty. According to Bartoshuk’s research,
 sweetness, saltiness, bitterness, and sourness can be tasted everywhere in the mouth, although they
 may be perceived at slightly different intensities at different sites. Moreover, the mechanism at work is not
 place, but time. It’s not that you taste sweetness at the tip of your tongue, but rather that you register that
 perception first. Similarly, bitterness is not perceived at the back of your mouth, rather, you taste it a few
 milliseconds after sweetness.


   A word about umami and kokumi. Umami was discovered in 1908 by Japanese chemist
Kikunae Ikeda. The word is Japanese for deliciousness or savoriness. Foods high in
umami share a high concentration of glutamates, which tend to magnify the flavor of the
food (see Umami, page 105). Kokumi (ko-KEW-mee) was first reported in 2009.
Scientists disagree on the taste (if any) of kokumi, but report that kokumi enhances taste
by triggering calcium receptors in the tongue. Kokumi is thought to be behind the fact that
meat slow-roasted for five hours tastes better than meat cooked for one, for example, or
why aged Gouda tastes better than new, young Gouda.
   The ability to taste is fully developed in utero (except for saltiness, which develops
postnatally, at about four months). But despite our entire-life experiences tasting, the basic
tastes take a wine drinker only so far. For example, as a teacher, I know that fifty people in
that classroom, all tasting the same wine at the same time in the same circumstances, will
nonetheless generate dozens of different metaphorical ideas about what the wine tastes
like and how intense or mild those sensations are. Moreover, some people in the group
will say they taste only a scant few things, while others will go off into a long list of
evocative descriptors: puppy’s breath, old women sitting in the wooden pews in church,
nice baby throw up (all are actual quotes; the single wine in question was a pinot noir).
                                       TIMING THE FINISH
          The finish of a wine is the extent to which its aromas and flavors persist in your mouth,
          even after you’ve swallowed. All truly great wines have a long finish. By contrast, the
          flavor of, say, a jug wine disappears almost as soon as you swallow it (a blessing of
          sorts).
              You can get a good sense of the length of the finish by using a technique called
          retronasal breathing. To do this: Take a sip, hold the wine in your mouth, swirl it around,
          and swallow it, keeping your mouth closed. With your mouth still closed, breathe out
          forcefully through your nose. (Make sure you swallow before breathing out, or you’ll be
          in for a dry-cleaning bill.) Now notice the sensation. If the wine has a long finish, you’ll
          still be able to smell and taste it even though you’ve swallowed. If it has a short finish,
          you’ll sense very little, if any, flavor or aroma.
            How long is a long finish? Using a stopwatch to time the finish may be a little too
          geeky for most of us, but you can expect a really long finish to hang in for up to a
          minute, and occasionally even longer.



           ARE WOMEN BETTER WINE TASTERS THAN MEN?
    Wouldn’t that be nice. Alas, there’s no scientific proof that women are categorically superior to men when
    it comes to wine tasting. According to Dr. Ann Noble, who, until her retirement, was one of the leading
    sensory scientists in the Department of Viticulture and Enology at the University of California at Davis,
    women do not have better sensory skills, but they may, at least initially, have better language skills. Noble
    theorizes that, because women spend more time in the kitchen and at the market working with food, they
    have “larger aroma libraries in their brains” and are therefore more adept at describing what they taste.


   So why is taste so hard to pin down and seemingly so different for each of us?
Moreover, why does every wine lover, at least some of the time, experience “language
block,” that moment when you know for sure what you think about a wine but just can’t
say it?
   Interestingly, language does describe other things quite well. Linguists point out, for
example, that we do have fairly accurate words to describe shape, size, color, and spatial
relationships. If I say that, in front of me, there’s a blue square plate 6 inches by 6 inches,
and on it is sitting a scoop of lemon sherbet about 2 inches in diameter, you can easily and
accurately visualize the dessert even if you never actually see it. But if I say the wine that
I’m tasting is elegant, well, it’s virtually impossible for you to share in that experience
because you can only guess at what I mean by elegant, and, moreover, you might use the
same word to describe a very different sensation.
   Because there’s no good way to describe how a wine tastes, most of us resort to
comparing a wine’s flavors to objects whose meanings are generally agreed upon. We
might say, for example, that a wine tastes “like cherries” or “like chocolate.” But food
isn’t the only arena that offers metaphorical possibilities. So does music, contemporary
culture, architecture, and so on. Of course, you might find some descriptions a bit over-
the-top (“it’s a precocious little wine and its femininity is alluring…”). But the truth is that
these creative, if idiosyncratic, attempts to describe how a wine tastes do carry some
meaning that can orient the taster. Most people, for example, know what’s meant when a
wine is described as lemony. Describing a wine as “warm lemon meringue pie with bits of
burnt crust” is just going one step farther in the attempt to telescope down to what the
experience of tasting the wine was actually like, and to create a “memory note” so the
wine can be remembered later.
    As with aroma, pros tend to suggest taste ideas to themselves as they are tasting, rather
than wait for specific flavors to occur to them (and risk that absolutely nothing will occur
to them). That is, while the wine is in his mouth, the professional taster is running possible
flavors through his mind—apples? caramel? grass? tobacco?—and in a sense, checking off
those flavors that are present.




       Conducting a private wine seminar for a corporate client. I lead several such wine events each year.
                              ARE YOU A SUPERTASTER?
How intensely you experience a given taste sensation depends on whether you’re what scientists call a
“nontaster,” a “taster,” or a “supertaster.” About a quarter of the population are nontasters, a quarter are
supertasters, and half are regular tasters. Looking at the data by gender, interestingly, 35 percent of
women are supertasters while just 10 percent of men are. Supertaster abilities are also more common in
Asians and in African Americans than in Caucasians. To determine if a person is a nontaster, taster, or
supertaster, researchers give the subject a small taste of the nontoxic compounds 6-n-propylthiouracil
(known as PROP) or phenyl thio carbamate (known as PTC).
   Supertasters experience this compound as so bitter they want to gag, while tasters detect a faint
whisper of bitterness and nontasters experience no taste sensation at all. Finally, but importantly, the
term supertaster sounds thoroughly desirable (who doesn’t want to be super at most things?)—but it is
not. Supertasters live in a neon taste world where many flavor impressions are just too intense to enjoy.
According to Dr. Hildegarde Heymann, professor and enologist in the Department of Viticulture and
Enology at the University of California at Davis, supertasters usually dislike the taste of broccoli, spinach,
cabbage, and sprouts; hot curry and chili; grapefruit and lemon; cigarettes; coffee; and (oh no) alcohol.
Good-bye wine.
             SAUERKRAUT, SKUNKS, AND SWEATY SOCKS
You bought a bottle of wine that you’d been wanting to try. Finally, the moment arrived and you pulled the
cork. What greeted you was a smell one step away from sweaty socks. What went wrong?
   Wines can develop foul odors and tastes for a wide variety of reasons, ranging from the presence of
offensive-smelling bacteria to overexposure to oxygen to unclean barrels. A full understanding of these
aromas would require mastery of organic chemistry. Here, instead, I’ve provided some simple
explanations of why you might think that the wine you just opened is not like anything you’d want to drink.
Keep in mind that the number of wines with off-putting aromas is a small fraction of the total number of
wines produced each year. Still, when you come across such a wine, can you return it to the shop where
you bought it? For most of the entries below, the answer is yes. A wine that smells like nail polish
remover or wet cardboard will immediately be taken back by any reputable wine shop. But keep in mind
that some of the concerns below are a matter of degree—brettanomyces (breh-tan-o-MY-seas) for
example. With brettanomyces, an amount that you consider objectionable may well seem just fine for
another wine drinker.
BANANA AROMAS: A by-product of malolactic fermentation, a process during which malic acid, which
has a crisp mouthfeel, is converted to lactic acid, which is softer. While a small amount of banana aroma
and flavor is not objectionable, a significant amount tastes odd, especially in red wines.
BAND-AID AROMAS: One of the manifestations of brettanomyces (see Barnyard).
BARNYARD/HORSE BLANKET/MANURE AROMAS: A sign of brettanomyces, sometimes called brett,
a strain of yeast that robs wine of its fruity aromas and flavors. While many winemakers—especially in
the New World—abhor even the faintest aroma of brettanomyces, other winemakers find a faint
suggestion of the barnyard aroma attractive. Brettanomyces can generally be prevented in wine by
scrupulous sanitation in the winery and during the winemaking process.
BURNING MATCH AROMAS: A sign of excessive sulfur dioxide. Sulfur has been used as a preservative
for centuries. It is used in the vineyard to protect vines from mildew and mold, and in the winery to protect
grapes and grape juice from oxygen, unwanted yeasts, and bacteria that may cause them to spoil. It is
impossible to produce a wine entirely without sulfur dioxide since, even when it is not added by
winemakers, the compound is a natural byproduct of fermentation (see Warming: This Label Is
Misleading on page 41). Burning match aromas usually dissipate as the wine opens up in the presence
of oxygen.
CANNED ASPARAGUS AROMAS: Often a sign that the vines were not carefully farmed and that the
grapes were picked unripe.
DIRTY SOCK AROMAS: Could be the result of myriad problems, anything from bacterial contamination
to unclean barrels.
FAKE BUTTER/OILY AROMAS: The result of excessive diacetyl, the buttery compound formed during
malolactic fermentation, when the wine’s crisp-tasting malic acid is converted to softer-tasting lactic acid.
Although a small amount of diacetyl can be attractive, a large amount tastes very offensive.
MOLDY AROMAS: Bacterial spoilage, moldy grapes, or unclean barrels can all produce a moldy aroma.
NAIL POLISH REMOVER/PAINT THINNER AROMAS: A sign of ethyl acetate, a harsh-smelling
compound that can be formed when acetic acid bacteria (also known as acetobacter) combines with
ethanol, the most common type of alcohol in wine. Acetic acid bacteria are the bacteria that eventually
turn wine into vinegar.
                              When it’s not right, you know (usually right away).
OXYDIZED AROMAS: A sign that the wine has been excessively exposed to oxygen. It’s important to
note that a little bit of oxygen can help a wine taste open and evolved. In addition, certain wines—notably
Sherry, tawny Port, and Madeira—take their characters from intentional exposure to oxygen in a
controlled manner. But a table wine that has been damaged by too much oxygen is a different story. In
the winery, oxidation can be minimized by careful and quick handling of both the grapes and the wine. At
home, oxidation can be prevented by storing bottles on their sides, so that the cork remains moist and
forms a tight seal with the neck of the bottle. Oxidized wines take on a brownish or burnt orange color,
which is especially noticeable in whites.
ROTTEN EGG AROMAS: Hydrogen sulfide, a foul-smelling gas that can be created during or at the end
of fermentation, has the odor of rotten eggs or a dirty fish tank. Hydrogen sulfide can be the result of an
excessive amount of sulfur applied late to grapevines, usually to prevent mildew or rot. The formation of
hydrogen sulfide is exacerbated when the grape juice is deficient in nitrogen, which is present naturally in
the juice, as a result of nitrogen compounds in soil.
ROTTING ONION AROMAS: A sign of mercaptan compounds. These horrible-smelling compounds can
be created after fermentation, when hydrogen sulfide and other basic sulfur compounds combine to
create larger compounds that smell like rotting onions or spoiled garlic. Mild skunky aromas, on the other
hand, may indicate the wine is temporarily “reduced” and needs oxygen (vigorous swirling in the glass
will do), which will then dissipate the aroma.
RUBBING ALCOHOL AROMAS: Usually experienced as a hit high up in the nostrils, the aroma of
rubbing alcohol indicates that the wine’s alcohol is out of balance with its fruit and acidity. A wine that is
too high in alcohol feels caustic in the mouth and is described as “hot” (see What Makes Wine, Wine? on
page 9).
VINEGARY AROMAS: A sign of volatile acidity (VA) caused by acetic acid bacteria, which can begin to
grow in wines in which the fermentation is not handled properly, or at any time when alcohol, oxygen, and
acetic acid bacteria find themselves together, especially in a warm environment.
WET CARDBOARD AROMAS: A dank, wet cardboard aroma indicates that the cork and subsequently
the wine have been contaminated by one of a series of compounds, the lead one of which is
trichloroanisole (commonly called TCA), perceptible when present in amounts as minuscule as 5 to 10
parts per trillion (equal to a drop of water in an Olympic-size swimming pool). This fault in wine is referred
to as “corked.” While a corked wine won’t hurt you, it smells unattractive—rather like a wet sheepdog
sitting on damp cardboard in a dank basement. The leading industry solution to corkiness is closing wine
bottles with a modern screw cap, rather than cork bark.

 For my part, I start by imagining about fifty different common flavors as I taste a wine.
   Finally, if there’s one practical aspect of tasting that’s important, it is this: Don’t
swallow too quickly. As with medicine, if you swallow a wine superquickly, you won’t
taste it at all. “Down the hatch” is an idea best saved for cheap tequila.
                              SEDIMENT AND TARTRATES
Every now and then you may come across a wine that has small particles in it. Chances are, this is either
sediment or tartrates. Sediment occurs only in older red wines—wines that are usually ten years old or
more. As red wine ages, color pigments in the wine combine with tannin to form long chains of molecules
too heavy to stay in solution. These sometimes precipitate out, forming a sediment—a group of rather
large dark red particles that appear in the wine.
   Sediment is tasteless and harmless, but it can feel a little gritty on your teeth, which is one of the
reasons red wines with sediment are decanted.
   So-called tartrates (actually potassium bitartrate crystals) are also tasteless and harmless. These are
the whitish/clear snowflakelike crystals that are sometimes found floating in white wine or sticking to the
bottom of the cork. These crystals (which are the same as cream of tartar) are bits of natural tartaric acid
that have precipitated out of the wine, usually because of a quick and extreme drop in temperature.
                       CONFIRMING THE COLOR

Most wine books deal with color first. Indeed, the color of a wine “sets us up,” giving us
some basis (or so we think) for anticipating a wine’s aromas and flavors.
   But color is not necessarily tied to aroma or flavor. For me, in fact, the color of a wine
(beautiful though it may be) is the last thing I think about when I evaluate a wine. I’ve
therefore chosen to put color last in this discussion.
   The color of a given wine comes from a group of pigments in grape skins called
anthocyanins. The correct way to look at color is not to hold the glass up in the air, but
rather to look down and across the wine-filled glass while holding it at a 45-degree angle.
   Different grape varieties have different hues. Pinot noir makes a wine that is usually
light brick in color; gamay can be lipstick red; zinfandel, electric purple; and nebbiolo,
almost black. When an experienced taster is given an unidentified wine, color is often the
final icing on the cake as to the wine’s identity. Color is also a clue to age. White and red
wines behave inversely: White wines get darker as they get older; red wines get lighter as
they get older.
   Beware the common mistake of thinking that the intensity of a wine’s color is related to
the intensity of its flavor. Despite how counterintuitive this seems, deeply red wines (like
cabernet sauvignon) are not necessarily more flavorful than pale red wines (like pinot
noir).
   Finally, clarity of color—often called limpidity—is also important. Today, improved
winemaking means that virtually all well-made white wines have clarity. For red wine,
clarity is neither wholly good nor bad. Many great reds have perfect clarity, and others
(those that have not been filtered, for example) may seem more opaque.
The delicious triumvirate of wine, food, and great friends.
MARRYING WELL: WINE AND FOOD

Since its origins approximately eight thousand years ago, wine has always had a constant,
delicious companion: food. For most of European history, little distinction was drawn
between the two. Wine was food. A solace. A source of calories. As intimate a part of life
as breathing.
   That we’ve come to a time when we need guidance on the marrying of these two primal
forces is an intriguing conversation in itself. But here, my purpose is different. Here, I
hope to remind us all about affinities. And set the course for some thrilling combinations.
   Let me begin by admitting that I don’t think every wine always needs to be perfectly
matched to a food, or vice versa. And I don’t say this because I lack passion for food.
Flavor is flavor. It doesn’t matter to me if it’s liquid or solid in my mouth. Moreover, I
started out as a food (not a wine) writer; I love to cook, and as you will perhaps deduce
from the many food sections scattered throughout the chapters of this book, I have a deep
appreciation for the historic connection between the foods of a place and the wines of a
place. Together the two allow us, however briefly, to actually participate in the culture of a
place. And that, it seems to me, is one of the true gifts wine and food offer us.

      “The food was average but the meal was great.”
                                                            — ANDREW JEFFORD,
                                               writing about a meal in The New France

    Wine and food matching is a bit different. In the United States, beginning in the 1980s,
wine and food pairing became something of a national sport. Restaurants offered wine and
food dinners; food magazines began to suggest wines with certain recipes; the back labels
on bottles of American wines began to suggest accompanying dishes (although one of the
first wineries to do this in the world was Napa Valley’s Beaulieu Vineyard, back in the
1960s). It was all very exciting.
   But as time went on, what started out as an exploration meant to heighten enjoyment
began to take the form of just another set of “rules” complex enough to make anyone
dizzy. Acidity contrasts with salt. Salt fights with fat. Umami decreases bitterness. And on
and on.
   The problem with this sort of approach is that it has very little connection—today or
historically—to how we actually behave when we cook, eat, and drink. A hundred years
ago, did an Italian grandmother stop to consider the acidity level in her pasta sauce before
choosing a wine for dinner? I doubt it. Admitedly, she had very little choice; only a
limited selection of wines would have been available to her. But it’s also true that, both
then and now, we sometimes choose wines as much to match the mood as the food.
Sometimes maybe more so. All of this is simply to point out that wine and food don’t
always have to be technically perfect together to be delicious anyway.
   That said, it’s certainly true that extraordinary flavor affinities do exist, and that most of
us have had at least a few of those “wow” moments when the wine-and-food combination
was unbelievably good.
   How do you create those moments? It isn’t easy. A meal, after all, rarely highlights the
flavor of a single food, and many dishes present countless variables. Say you were trying
to choose a wine to go with grilled chicken breasts with spicy coconut sauce. What exactly
would you be matching? The chicken? The coconut milk? The spices and chiles in the
sauce? And what if those chicken breasts were just one part of the dish? What if they were
accompanied by a rice pilaf seasoned with coriander, cumin, and toasted almonds?




   Lamb may be the most versatile meat for the world’s greatest reds. Historically in Europe, it was the traditional
       accompaniment to everything from great Bordeaux to fine Rioja to the powerful Naoussas of Greece.

   There’s simply no absolute way to predict what might happen when all these flavors,
plus the multiple flavors in a wine, are all swirled together, like in a giant kaleidoscope.
And even if you could predict the result, would we really all agree on whether it was
delicious? Ultimately, taste preferences are highly individual.
   So where does that leave us? To me, it leaves us squarely in the realm of instinct.
People who pair wine and food together well don’t have a set of rules as much as they
have good instincts. And good instincts can be acquired. It’s simply a matter of drinking
lots of different kinds of wines with different kinds of dishes and paying attention to the
principles that emerge. After years of doing precisely that, here’s what I’ve discovered.
                                RISKY RELATIONSHIPS
The following foods can be a challenge to pair with wine. Incorporate them carefully, using cooking
techniques like grilling and/or combining them with other ingredients, like bacon or cream, to minimize
the impact these foods can have on wines.
ARTICHOKES: Artichokes contain cynarin, an amino acid that can produce the impression of cloying
sweetness and an unpleasant, metallic taste in wines.
ASPARAGUS: Asparagus contains mercaptan, a skunky-smelling compound associated with a fault in
wine.
CHILES: Hot chiles contain capsaicin, which can make wines high in alcohol taste unpleasantly hot, and
accentuate astringency in tannic wines.
CRUCIFEROUS VEGETABLES: Broccoli, cauliflower, kale, and cabbage are examples of cruciferous
vegetables. All members of this healthy family contain sulfur and release sulfur compounds when
cooked, often contributing an off-flavor impression to wines.
EGGS: Eggs also contain sulfur, and release sulfur compounds when cooked, often contributing an off-
flavor impression to wines.
VINEGAR: Vinegar and foods pickled in vinegar contain high concentrations of acetic acid, which can
rob wines of their fruit flavors, and often create a bitter or astringent taste impression.
  THE TEN MOST IMPORTANT PRINCIPLES BEHIND
             GREAT MARRIAGES

THIS MIGHT SEEM LIKE THE MOST ELEMENTAL OF IDEAS, BUT FOR ME, THE FIRST IMPORTANT
PRINCIPLE IS SIMPLY: Pair great with great, humble with humble. A hot turkey sandwich
doesn’t need a pricey merlot to accompany it. On the other hand, an expensive crown rib
roast may just present the perfect moment for opening that powerful, opulent Napa Valley
cabernet sauvignon you’ve been saving.
SECOND, MATCH DELICATE TO DELICATE, BOLD TO BOLD.        It only makes sense that a delicate
wine like a red Burgundy will end up tasting like water if you serve it with a dramatically
bold dish like curry. Dishes with bold, piquant, spicy, and hot flavors are perfectly cut out
for bold, spicy, big-flavored wines. Which is why various shirazes are terrific with many
“hot and spicy” cuisines.

      “It takes me twelve minutes to eat a good plate of food and two hours to drink
      a good bottle of wine, so who cares about the food?”
                                                                — PETER BARRY,
                      owner of Australia’s Jim Barry winery, renowned for its shirazes

DECIDE IF YOU WANT TO MIRROR A GIVEN FLAVOR, OR SET UP A CONTRAST.         Chardonnay with
lobster in cream sauce would be an example of mirroring. Both the lobster and the
chardonnay are opulent, rich, and creamy. But delicious matches also happen when you go
in exactly the opposite direction and create contrast and juxtaposition. That lobster in
cream sauce would also be fascinating with Champagne, which is sleek, crisp, and sharply
tingling because of the bubbles.

                      THE WHITE-WINE-WITH-FISH RULE
         The old chestnut “white wine with fish; red wine with meat” is based on matching body
         (the weight of the wine in the mouth) and color. The adage dates from the days when
         many white wines were light in body and whitish in color (like fish), and many red wines
         were weighty and, obviously, red (like meat). It is, however, the body and components
         of the wine—not its color—that are important in matching wine with food. Some red
         wines, for example, are far lighter in body than white wines (compare, say, an Oregon
         pinot noir with a Sonoma chardonnay). Today, many wine lovers have abandoned the
         old rule and have begun drinking red wine with fish. Red Burgundy and sushi?—yes.

THINK ABOUT A WINE’S FLEXIBILITY.       Although chardonnay is wildly popular in many parts
of the world, it’s one of the least flexible white wines with food. Chardonnays often have
so much toasty oak and high alcohol that they taste hard and dull when accompanied by
food. For maximum flexibility, go with a sauvignon blanc or a dry riesling, both of which
have cleansing acidity. Wines with high acidity leave you wanting to take a bite of food,
and after taking a bite of food, you’ll want a sip of wine. The perfect seesaw. The most
flexible red wines either have good acidity, such as Chianti, red Burgundy, and California
and Oregon pinot noir, or they have loads of fruit and not a lot of tannin. For the latter
reason, zinfandel, lots of simple Italian reds, and southern Rhône wines, such as
Châteauneuf-du-Pape, are naturals with a wide range of dishes, from such simple comfort
foods as grilled chicken to more complex dishes like pasta Bolognese.




          Salmon works well with both red wine and white. Here, green beans dictate the final decision.

NOT SURPRISINGLY, DISHES WITH FRUIT IN THEM OR A FRUIT COMPONENT TO THEM—pork
with sautéed apples, roasted chicken with apricot glaze, duck with figs, and so forth—
often pair beautifully with very fruit-driven wines that have super-fruity aromas.
Gewürztraminer, muscat, viognier, and riesling are in this camp.
SALTINESS IN FOOD IS A GREAT CONTRAST TO ACIDITY IN WINE.      Think about smoked salmon
and Champagne, or Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese and Chianti. Asian dishes that have soy
sauce in them often pair well with high-acid wines like riesling.
                                    COOKING WITH WINE
Anywhere wine is made, it is used, usually liberally, in cooking. And for good reason. Wine layers in more
flavor and richness than water. In addition, wine is often included as a final splash of flavor in sauces and
various dishes.
   The concern (if that’s the right word) has always been: What happens to the alcohol? And the
conventional wisdom has been that after a few minutes of cooking, the alcohol in wine evaporates and is
therefore eliminated.
   That’s not exactly the case. Research conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in the mid-
1990s showed that 85 percent of the alcohol remained when alcohol was added to a boiling liquid that
was then removed from the heat. The longer something is cooked, however, the less alcohol remains.
When a food is baked or simmered for 15 minutes, about 40 percent of the alcohol remains. After one
hour, only 25 percent remains and after 2½ hours, just 5 percent will be present. (Remember that wine
does not have huge amounts of alcohol to begin with—most wines are between 12 and 15 percent
alcohol by volume—so for most people, the final amount of alcohol remaining in a dish is usually not a
problem.)
  As for cooking with wine, here are the most important guidelines:
NEVER use poor-quality wine. If you wouldn’t drink it, don’t pour it into the stew. A poor-quality wine with
sour or bitter flavors will only contribute those flavors to the dish.
NEVER use “cooking sherry” or other wines billed for cooking. These wretched liquids are horrible-
tasting, cheap, thin base wines to which salt and food coloring have been added.

      “I cook with wine; sometimes I even add it to the food.”
                                                                                    — W. C. FIELDS

IF A RECIPE calls for dry white wine, many whites from all over the world will work, but one of the best
and easiest choices is a good-quality sauvignon blanc or Sancerre, which will contribute a fresh, light
herbal lift.
IF THE RECIPE calls for dry red wine, think about the heartiness of the dish. A rustic, long-cooked
casserole or a substantial stew often needs a correspondingly hearty wine. Use a big-bodied shiraz,
zinfandel, or red from the south of Spain, Italy, or France.
DON’T pass up Port, Madeira, Marsala, and the nutty styles of Sherry, such as amontillado and oloroso. I
could not cook without these scrumptious wines. All four are fortified, which means they have slightly
more alcohol, but they all pack a bigger wallop of flavor, too. Plus, opened, they can be used for cooking
for several months or more. Be sure to use the real thing. Port from Portugal, Sherry from Spain, and so
on. Most ersatz New World versions are far weaker in flavor. Port has a rich, sweet, winey flavor, a real
plus in meat casseroles. Sherry’s complex, roasted, nutty flavors can transform just about any soup,
stew, or sautéed dish. Madeira can be mesmerizingly lush, with toffee and caramel flavors; use the
medium-rich style known as bual. And Marsala’s light, caramel-like fruitiness is incomparable in
Mediterranean sautés. I like to use dry Marsala rather than sweet.
          A savory cheese tart. White wines high in acidity work best to balance the salt and fat in cheese.

SALTINESS IS ALSO A STUNNINGLY DELICIOUS CONTRAST TO SWEETNESS.         Try that Asian dish
seasoned with soy sauce with an American riesling that’s slightly sweet, and watch both
the food and the wine pull together in a new way. This is the principle behind that great
old European custom of serving Stilton cheese (something salty) with Port (something
sweet).
A HIGH-FAT FOOD, SOMETHING WITH A LOT OF ANIMAL FAT, BUTTER, OR CREAM, USUALLY
CALLS OUT FOR AN EQUALLY RICH, INTENSE, STRUCTURED, AND CONCENTRATED WINE.
Here’s where a well-balanced red wine with tannin, such as a good-quality cabernet
sauvignon or merlot, works wonders. The immense structure of the wine stands up to the
formidableness of the meat. And at the same time, the meat’s richness and fat serves to
soften the impact of the wine’s tannin. A powerful California cabernet sauvignon with a
grilled steak is pretty hard to beat. This same principle is at work when a Bordeaux wine
(made primarily from cabernet sauvignon and merlot) is served with roasted lamb. And
pairing richness with richness is also the principle behind what is perhaps the most
decadent French wine and food marriage of all: Sauternes and foie gras.

                                      BUT NONE FROM FAT
    One 5-ounce glass of typical white wine contains about 104 calories; a typical red contains about 110.
    Wines that have a small touch of sweetness may have an additional 5 to 10 calories. By comparison, the
    same amount of grape juice has about the same number of calories—102.

CONSIDER UMAMI    (see Umami, page 105), the fifth taste, which is responsible for a sense
of deliciousness in foods. Chefs increasingly use foods high in umami, such as
Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese, soy sauce, wild mushrooms, and most red meats, to build a
dish, and potentially make it sensational with wine. When wine and food are paired well
together, adding an umami component to the food often serves to heighten the overall
experience. So, for example, we know steak and cabernet sauvignon to be a successful
match. Topping the steak with grilled mushrooms gives the overall combination even
more punch.
WITH DESSERTS, CONSIDER SWEETNESS CAREFULLY.        Desserts that are sweeter than the wine
they accompany make the wine taste dull and blank. In effect, the sweetness of the dessert
can knock out the character of the wine. Wedding cake, for example, can ruin just about
anything in a glass, although happily, no one’s paying attention anyway. The best dessert
and dessert wine marriages are usually based on pairing a not-too-sweet dessert, such as a
fruit or nut tart, with a sweeter wine.
   So there they are, a group of pretty simple principles, meant only as a guide. The real
excitement is in the experimentation, and only you can do that.
I love this photo… memories of countless dinner parties and dining tables full of wineglasses. Why serve one wine with a
                                  dish when two is so much better for conversation?
THE TEN QUESTIONS ALL WINE DRINKERS ASK

What makes wine continually fascinating is that, apart from the hedonistic pleasure it
provides, it appeals to the intellect in a way that, say, root beer or vodka do not. And
because wine entices the mind, wine lovers are always beset by questions: Should you let
a wine breathe? How much do vintages matter? How long does wine need to age? Even
simple issues present challenges: What constitutes a good wineglass? What’s the right
temperature at which to serve a wine?
    I hope this final section will provide you with solid answers. I’ll begin with my own
first question/conundrum: How to feel comfortable in a wine shop.
      HOW CAN I BUY WINE MORE COMFORTABLY?

In such a complex world, buying a bottle of wine for dinner should be one of life’s easier
(and happier) tasks. Unfortunately, it often doesn’t seem that way. When I first started
buying wine, I was so overwhelmed by the sheer number of bottles in my local wine shop
that for a good six months, I simply chose from a cache of assorted wines on sale, all
sitting in a bin positioned near the cash register (allowing at the very least for a quick
getaway should embarrassment set in). I was about twenty-one and, as I recall, I wound up
drinking a lot of cheap Bulgarian wine, which was (somewhat inexplicably) what the bin
usually contained. The fact is, navigating a wine shop isn’t a snap. Even a medium-size
wine shop might have seven hundred or so different wines and a large store, four thousand
or more. So how do you make buying wine a comfortable experience? Here are some
insider tips.




A thousand points of deliciousness. That’s how I think of a wine shop. But having a shopping strategy is always helpful.

CHOOSE THE RIGHT WINE SHOP.      Forget the stuffy places. At the same time, don’t
necessarily opt for a big, impersonal discount store. Many discount stores employ people
who know next to nothing about wine. You want someplace different from either of these
—a place that lets you browse, ask questions (and get answers)—a place where, over time,
you can get to know one or two of the staff well enough to trust them to point out new and
exciting wines.
DON’T LET THAT LITTLE VOICE IN YOUR HEAD SAY, “YOU’LL NEVER UNDERSTAND THIS.”         Don’t
forget, there was a time when you didn’t know what avocados, sushi, or peach ice cream
tasted like either. But you decided to give each of them a try anyway, and in so doing, you
expanded your knowledge about different foods and their flavors. Trying a wine you don’t
yet know is really the same thing.
TACKLE THE WINE WORLD ONE PLACE AT A TIME.         Choose a single country—any country—
and for six months, drink only wines from that country, avoiding everything else. Let’s say
you choose Spain. What you’ll find, surprisingly enough, is that after six months of
choosing bottles only from Spain, you’ll have a feel for the flavors and textures of Spanish
wine. Once you’ve got country number one under your belt, move to the next country. In
this systematic way, you’ll build up a reservoir of wine experiences associated with certain
places and, best of all, in a controlled way you’ll begin to know the flavors you love, the
flavors you like, and the flavors you’d just as soon let somebody else have.

                             THE BEGINNINGS OF BOOZE
    The word booze, once spelled bouse, comes from the medieval Dutch word büsen, meaning “to drink to
    excess.” Bouse dates back almost one thousand years, to medieval English, but was most commonly used
    in the sixteenth century by unsavory characters—thieves and beggars—before becoming used more
    frequently as general slang.
        THE TWELVE APOSTLES, A DOZEN EGGS, AND… THE
                    TWELVE-BOTTLE CASE
 One could make a case against cases. Why are the damn things so heavy? Why, for that matter, do they
 contain twelve bottles? When it comes to the latter, surprisingly, no one seems to know. The leading
 theory is that twelve bottles of wine (weighing 30 to 35 pounds/13 to 15 kilograms) is the upper limit of
 what most people can lift and carry at one time. The configuration of three bottles by four bottles renders
 the nearly-square case stable and therefore easy to stack in a warehouse or store. Stable stacking is
 much harder, for example, when the case is configured six bottles by two bottles, though admittedly a
 minority of cases are constructed this way. While it’s not clear when wine began to be shipped in case
 boxes, various types of goods have been packaged in multiples of six for as long as wine has been
 bottled (which is slightly more than three centuries). Indeed, a dozen is thought to be one of the most
 primitive groupings, perhaps because there are a dozen cycles of the moon, and a dozen months in a
 year. A dozen is also easily split up as ½, ⅓, ¼, ⅙, and      . The Romans, in fact, first used twelve as a
 way of subdividing their money. No matter how deeply embedded a dozen is in Western culture,
 however, the twelve-bottle wine case may soon be a memory. Already several European countries,
 including France, have banned twelve-bottle cases as being too heavy to lift and therefore potentially
 injurious to health. The French now package and buy their wine in tidy boxes of six bottles. And thus, no
 longer does un six-pack, s’il vous plaît just mean beer.

PUT PRICE IN PERSPECTIVE. A bottle of wine serves five. So that $25 wine is, per serving,
about what many people spend without a second thought on, say, a latte. In addition, there
are many very good, inexpensive wines—you just have to taste more widely to find them.
Wine professionals themselves often buy very reasonably priced wines for every-night
drinking.
THAT SAID, DON’T BE AFRAID TO TREAT YOURSELF.   There are extraordinary wine
experiences to be had, and you should have them! Occasionally springing for a special,
expensive bottle enriches your wine knowledge and can be very satisfying.
SET ASIDE A MODEST BUDGET FOR NEW WINE EXPERIENCES.       Then, once every week or two,
spend that money on a wine you’ve never had before. Remember: The best way to learn
nothing about wine is to continue to drink what you already know you like.
THINK OF WINE AS A WAY TO TRAVEL.      You may not be able to get to Tuscany or the south of
France next summer, but you can certainly have a lot of fun experimenting with Tuscan or
southern French wines anyway. Again, it doesn’t matter where you begin. If you’re
fascinated by Australia, start there. If you’ve never tried a wine from Argentina, try one
now.
BE ENDLESSLY CURIOUS.   You’re not the only one who doesn’t know what’s inside all those
bottles. Most people don’t. The wine drinkers who have the most fun and learn the most
are those who have the courage to be curious.
FINALLY, USE FOOD AS A LANGUAGE.      If you’re trying to describe to the wine shop staff the
kinds of wines you like and you’re at a loss for words, think about foods. Wines can be big
and juicy like a steak; fresh and light like a salad; or spicy and bold like a Thai soup. It
isn’t necessary to use technical wine terms. One day, wanting an adventure, I asked a
salesperson to give me a wine like the late comedian Robin Williams. Amazingly enough,
and without a minute’s hesitation, he did just that.
The great Burgundian Grand Cru red, Le Corton. To drink this wine would be to drink a moment in time—in 1964.
           Capturing time and nature in this way is a mind-blowing experience that only wine provides.
              HOW MUCH DO VINTAGES MATTER?

Imagine this scenario: A waiter comes back to a group of diners and explains that the
restaurant is out of the 2010 Château Pavie but has the 2012; would the customers like
that? Eyebrows furrow. No one wants to make a mistake. Someone tries a Google search
under the table. Should vintages be so troubling?
   Consider the reason behind giving wines vintage dates to begin with. Originally,
vintages were stated in order to give the buyer a date to count from. By knowing the
vintage, one could tell how old the wine was, and since old wines were often not very
good, this information was valuable.
   The second premise of vintage dating is that, as a rule (especially in the Old World),
weather is not necessarily on a grapevine’s side. Historically, listing the vintage was a way
of alerting consumers to certain years when very bad weather led to wines that were
disappointingly thin. Such wines would generally be priced cheaply. People would drink
the poor vintage until a better vintage came along, but no one would buy up cases of the
wine and cellar it away to age.
  Winemakers played a very small role in this annual drama. No matter how talented they
were, Nature had the upper hand and the final say. From both the winemakers’ and the
wine drinkers’ standpoints, vintages had to be accepted for what they were. Some were
poor, some were good, most were somewhere in between… and were happily drunk.
   In the past thirty plus years, however, the picture has changed. Both winemaking
technology and viticultural science have advanced to such a degree that talented
winemakers can sometimes turn out delicious wines even when Nature is working against
them. The fact is, weather can now have a less detrimental impact on the final wine than it
once did. This is not to say that wines taste the same every year; they clearly do not. But
given the knowledge, skill, and access to technology winemakers now have, vintage
differences are often differences of character. For example, in a hot year many wines will
be packed with bigger, jammier fruit flavors. In a cool year they will be more austere,
lighter in body, and perhaps more elegant. Are any of these qualities terrible? Isn’t it at
least theoretically possible to like both kinds of wine? Unfortunately, vintage assessments
assume that, for all wines and all wine drinkers everywhere, greatness comes in one form.
But that is simply not true.
    There is another problem: Vintages are generally categorized by the media once—when
the new wine is tasted in the spring following the harvest. But wine changes over time.
There are many examples of vintages deemed magnificent at first, only later to be declared
not as good as originally thought, as well as the opposite—vintages proclaimed average at
first and later awarded praise. From a wine drinker’s standpoint, what is the point of
memorizing the pluses and minuses of vintages if the pluses and minuses change? The
final, sensible approach can only be to have an open mind. Remember that wines evolve
and that one-shot vintage proclamations are entirely too superficial. Remember, too, that
talented winemakers can surprise us even when Nature has worked against them.
                               LEAD CRYSTAL
An English glassmaker named George Ravenscroft discovered, in 1674, that adding
lead oxide to molten glass made it softer and easier to work. As a result, lead crystal
could be cut into elaborate designs. But even more important, lead made glass more
durable and more brilliant.
   In 1991, researchers at Columbia University found that wine and other acidic
beverages left in lead crystal decanters for several months could absorb possibly
dangerous amounts of lead. Subsequently, the FDA recommended against storing
acidic foods and beverages for long periods of time in lead-glazed pottery or lead
crystal decanters. The specific health hazards, however, are still not known. Since wine
does not stay in a crystal glass long enough to leach lead from it, drinking wine from
lead crystal glasses is considered safe.
          WHERE AND HOW SHOULD I STORE WINE?

The ancient Greeks mixed wine with honey (sugar acts as a preservative), poured olive oil
on top of it (as a barrier to air), and stored it in large ceramic amphorae buried in the
ground to keep the wine cool. For thousands of years, wine lovers have been motivated to
store wine in a way that keeps it as wine, rather than expensive vinegar.
    By the sixteenth century, much of the wine traded throughout Europe was high in
alcohol and further fortified with brandy to preserve it. The base wine itself may have
come from any warm place along the Mediterranean, from southern Spain to Crete. In
many cases, the origin did not matter; what was important was that the raw wine be
fortified sufficiently that it would still be drinkable when it reached England, Ireland, or
northern Europe. Any wine that was not fortified was drunk immediately. These young,
fresh wines were highly desirable. For most of history, in fact, young wine was always
more expensive than old. Intentionally storing wine to age it came into practice only after
the eighteenth century, when bottles came into widespread use. When aged in a bottle with
a tight-fitting cork, wine not only did not turn to vinegar, but some of it actually improved
—sometimes markedly so, especially if it was red. For the first time, certain older wines
began to command a higher price than young wines. And “laying a wine down” to better it
began to take on sophisticated connotations.




 Cork—the historic closure for wine—is a miraculous material. But the 20th century gave us an additional asset: well-
                                           made, expensive screw caps.

   The legacy remains. Aging a wine still seems like the right thing to do with a
moderately expensive wine, even though the fact that most modern wine is actually not
meant to be aged for long periods of time. Virtually all white wines and rosé wines are
made to be drunk fresh and young. Even among red wines, only those with firm structure
and impeccable balance are meant for the long haul. The French make a distinction
between wines intended for current drinking and the far smaller universe of wines they
call vins de garde—wines to save.
   In reality, of course, many wines—even vins de garde—are “saved” just about as long
as it takes to get them home from the store. Still, despite the pull of immediate
gratification, most of us will eventually be faced with the issue of wine storage.
   First off, it’s important to recognize that wine doesn’t care if it’s stored in a $20,000
custom-built cellar, in the basement, or between shoes in the closet, as long as three things
are true:
   • The environment is cool
   • The bottle is lying on its side or upside down (not standing upright)
   • There is no direct sunlight
   Storage temperature matters because it can dramatically affect the rate at which various
chemical changes will take place as the wine matures. Wines forced to mature too quickly
show a sharp, exaggerated curve of awkward development, followed by dramatic
deterioration. In a hot room, a fine wine can be shoved so quickly through the stages of
aging that it begins to unravel. In order to develop properly and with stability, a fine wine
must mature slowly over a long period of time. Scientists say this happens best when
wines are kept at about 55°F (13°C). For less expensive, every-night wines, a constant
temperature of 70°F (21°C) or lower is fine.
   What now comes to mind for many people is the wine-in-the-trunk question. How long
can a wine be exposed to imperfect temperatures and still remain good? Professor
Cornelius Ough, of the Department of Viticulture and Enology at the University of
California at Davis, notes that most wines of average quality could be heated to 120°F
(49°C) for a few hours (as in the trunk of a car in summer) and remain unscathed.
However, several days at such temperatures would cause the wines to taste cooked or
stewed. Speaking personally, I wouldn’t leave a rare, older, or great wine in a hot trunk for
even ten minutes.
    Scientists also insist that violent swings of temperature are detrimental—as, for
example, when a wine is alternately taken out of a hot closet and put into a cold
refrigerator several times because plans to drink it have changed. Extreme fluctuations in
temperature can affect both how the wine matures and the pressure inside the bottle, which
in turn shifts the cork and thus may allow air to enter, oxidizing the wine. So once you’ve
chilled that bottle, drink it!
                                     SMELLING THE CORK
 You order a bottle of wine in a restaurant and the waiter puts the cork down beside you. Are you
 supposed to:
   • Smell it?
   • Feel it?
   • Glance at it, then ignore it?
   The answer is the third option. The practice of placing the cork on the table dates from the eighteenth
 century, when wineries began branding corks to prevent unscrupulous restaurateurs from filling an empty
 bottle of Château Expensive with inferior wine, recorking it, then reselling it as Château Expensive.
    In honest restaurants, the cork was placed on the table so the diner could see that the name on it
 matched that on the label, a guarantee that the wine had not been tampered with. Admittedly, feeling the
 cork tells you if the wine was stored on its side, and that can be a clue to its soundness. But a moist cork
 is no guarantee that the wine is in good condition; similarly, a dry cork does not necessarily portend a
 wine gone awry. As for smelling the cork, alas, many flaws—such as cork taint—can be detected only by
 smelling the actual wine. The smell of the cork itself is never a reliable indicator of a fault or of a wine’s
 character or quality.


   Similarly, when a wine is stored upright, the cork begins to dry out and shrink. After a
few months, air may begin to slip between the cork and the neck of the bottle, oxidizing
the wine. A bottle is best kept on its side or upside down, so that the cork, moist with the
wine, stays swollen against the neck of the bottle.
   Sunlight is harmful because ultraviolet light in particular causes free radicals (basically,
atoms with unpaired electrons) to develop in wine, resulting in rapid oxidation. This is
why the best wine stores don’t display wine in the windows, unless those bottles are
dummies that are not going to be sold.
   Finally, vibration may be detrimental, although scientists have not seen conclusive
evidence for this. Before Les Caves de Taillevent, one of the most famous wine shops in
central Paris, was built, the owners embarked on an extensive and nearly impossible
search to find a neighborhood location far away from all metros. Although the rumble of
Parisian trains is barely discernible anywhere beyond the train platform itself, the owners
decided not to take any chances with their multimillion-dollar inventory.
                    WHAT ALLOWS A WINE TO LAST?

In order to withstand time and age well, wine must have the right amount of sugar, acid, or
tannin. These are the three preservatives in wine. Without a significant amount of any of
them, most wines are better off being drunk at the next opportunity.
    Sugar is clearly a preservative. If you needed some honey and found a jar that had been
sitting in the back of your kitchen cabinet for ten years, you’d nonetheless (rightfully) use
it. (And a bottle of French Sauternes in your cellar is destined to go the long run.)
   Like a jar of honey, an old bottle of vinegar (acid) could always be employed in a salad
dressing. Wines high in acid—German rieslings for example—have amazing aging
potential.
   Tannin is the third preservative, but since it comes from the grapes’ skins, it is a factor
mainly in red wines. Yet it’s the most obvious entity in most collectors’ cellars, filled as
they are with high-tannin wines such as Bordeaux, Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon, and
Barolo, for example.




 To take wine from a barrel, winemakers use a tool called a “thief” that can be inserted into the bung hole. A “barrel
 sample” is usually not fully ready to drink, but it can give the taster an inkling of the wine’s character and what’s to
                                                          come.
                             WHEN IS IT READY?

The question of readiness is a frustrating one. Drinking a wine when its most interesting
flavors are being fully expressed is clearly preferable to drinking a wine that’s too young
to have anything much to say. On the other hand, opening a bottle you have patiently
saved only to find the wine has wizened and dried up in old age is sad, to say the least.
   So, let’s suppose you were given a bottle of Château Latour (current vintage) as a
birthday present. How would you know when to drink it? The first important realization is
this: Drinking wine is not like baking a cake. There is no magic moment when the wine is
ready. Most very good to great red wines evolve and soften progressively. They start out
with rather “tight” fruit that seems difficult to discern and, bit by bit, slowly
metamorphose into a supple, more complex drink with flavors that seem more vivid.
Where a wine lies along this spectrum at any point in time is a matter of conjecture.
   Interestingly, a wine somewhere in its midlife can also go into what winemakers call a
dumb phase, where it may actually taste almost blank—without charm, without depth. In
Bordeaux, this is called the wine’s age ingrat, difficult age. Like adolescence, it is not
permanent. And some wines never go through it. At some unknown point, however, every
wine turns its own corner and begins to move toward maturity.
    Predicting the arrival of that maturation remains anything but easy. Each wine is a
living substance that changes according to its own rhythms. This should not be
disillusioning. In fact, it is just the opposite. The unpredictability of wine makes it all the
more compelling. Never truly knowing what to expect is part of the attraction; it is why
wine appeals to the intellect in a way that, say, vodka does not. Best of all, the
incontrovertibly inexact nature of readiness is a good excuse for buying more than one
bottle of a fine wine, then opening them at several stages to see how they’re developing.
   I know. You still want a specific idea of when that bottle of Château Latour might be
ready, right? Use this as a bold-stroke guiding principle: The firmer and more structured
the wine (i.e., the more tannin or acid it has), the longer it can be kept. Drink inexpensive
and moderately priced wines now. With a very expensive, high-quality cabernet
sauvignon, merlot, nebbiolo, or other structured wines, the simplest rule of thumb is to
wait at least five years, and ten is better. If you want to get a sneak peek and drink it in
three years, you’ll probably still have a terrific experience (even though you will have
knowingly decided to forgo the additional nuances the wine might have slipped into given
more time).
                                 SERVING DESSERT WINES
Here are the major dessert wines from around the world, as well as information about how to serve them.
(Note that the dry styles of Madeira and Sherry are not included, since the dry styles are usually served
as aperitifs or with savory dishes.) Although some dessert wines are traditionally served in specially
designed glasses, the standard glass for white wine works fine for most dessert wines. A typical serving
is 2 to 3 ounces.

 WINE                                                           CHILL BOTTLE*         DECANT

 Sparkling dessert wine and demi-sec Champagne                  Yes                   No

 Sweet muscat (including orange muscat, black muscat,
 moscato, moscato d’Asti, muscat canelli, and muscat de         Yes                   No
 Beaumes-de-Venise)

 Icewine and eiswein                                            Yes                   No

 Late-harvest white wine and botrytized wine (including
 Sauternes, Barsac, late-harvest riesling, German
 beerenauslese (BA) and trockenbeerenauslese (TBA), late-
                                                                Yes                   No
 harvest sémillon, Austrian ausbruch, sweet Vouvray, Quarts
 de Chaume, Coteaux du Layon, Alsace vendange tardive,
 and sélection de grains nobles)

 Tokaji aszú                                                    Slightly chilled      No

 Dried grape wines (including vin santo and recioto della
                                                                No                    No
 Valpolicella)

 Banyuls                                                        Yes                   No

 Sherry (amontillado, palo cortado, oloroso, Pedro Ximénez)     No                    No

                                                                In summer, slightly
 Madeira (bual, malmsey)                                                              No
                                                                chilled

 Australian Port-style wines (Australian tawny, topaque, and
                                                                No                    No
 muscat)

 Port

        Tawny                                                   Slightly chilled      No

        Reserve, Late-Bottled Vintage                           No                    No

        Vintage, Single Quinta                                   No                    Yes


*No dessert wine should be served icy chilled. Most dessert wines taste best with a moderate chill of
45°F to 55°F (7°C to 13°C). One to two hours in the refrigerator should be sufficient.
          DOES SERVING TEMPERATURE MATTER?

On the first day of my wine classes, I serve two red wines, the identities of which have
been concealed, and ask the participants to pick the one they like better and describe why.
Invariably, most people like B, but there are always votes for both wines and a lively
discussion of how different the two wines are. In fact, wines A and B are the same red
wine—with one difference: B is about three degrees cooler than A.
   The class is always surprised, but perception of alcohol, acidity, fruitiness, and balance
are all influenced by small differences in a wine’s temperature. Temperature, in fact, can
make the difference between enthusiasm and indifference for the same wine.
    At cool temperatures, a white wine’s acidity is highlighted and the wine seems to taste
lighter and fresher. It is also possible, however, to chill a white down to the point where it
is so cold, it can barely be tasted at all since extreme cold anesthesizes the taste buds.
Increases in temperature have a different effect. As the temperature of a white wine rises,
its alcohol becomes more obvious and the wine begins to taste coarse. An already high-
alcohol chardonnay can taste almost caustic at too warm a temperature.
   Red wines are more tricky. While a red wine served too warm can also taste alcoholic
and coarse, the same wine overchilled can taste thin. Historically, the solution for red
wines has been simple: Serve them at room temperature—European room temperature
prior to central heating, that is. In other words, 60°F to 65°F (15°C to 18°C). Room
temperature today is, of course, generally far warmer, and many red wines don’t taste their
best as a result. You can easily demonstrate this for yourself. Pour a glass of good red
wine from a bottle that has been kept in a warm room. Now chill the rest of the bottle in a
bucket of ice and water for five to ten minutes. The idea is not to make the red wine cold,
but simply to bring its temperature down to about 65°F (18°C). At that temperature, good
red wines taste balanced, focused, and full of fruit. Because most of us don’t get a
thermometer out when we open a bottle of wine, a good rule of thumb is this: Imagine the
temperature of a movie theater in summer. That’s where most red wines need to be.
  There are, of course, exceptions to the idea above. Extremely fruity, low-tannin red
wines—Beaujolais is the main example—should be cooled almost as much as white
wines, so that their fruitiness is magnified.
         MAN’S BEST FRIEND: A GOOD CORKSCREW

Canines aside, man’s best friend is surely an obliging corkscrew—one that does not
require the user to have bell-shaped biceps; one that does not shred the cork to smithereens
half the time. Today, decent corkscrews exist. For most of history, however, they have
been frustrating, imperfectly designed tools.
   Originally called bottle-screws, corkscrews were invented in England between 1630
and 1675, where they were used not for wine but for beer and cider. Both sparklers
required tight-fitting corks (often tied on) capable of trapping fermenting gas (which
would have quickly dissipated had the cider or beer been stored in casks). Such corks,
forced deep into the neck of the bottle, often proved impossible to extract without the help
of some kind of tool.
   The first tool took its inspiration from a gun. Manufacturing records from the 1630s
describe a bullet-extracting “worm” that was to be used with muskets and pistols. By the
1800s, several English firms that manufactured steel worms for muzzle-loaded firearms
also made corkscrews.




  The Ah-So cork remover, invented in 1879, is especially helpful with older wines that have fragile, crumbling corks.

   Corkscrews went from being helpful to being essential with the discovery that wine
matures favorably in bottles, as well as in casks. New, cylindrical aging bottles, meant to
be laid on their side and stacked for long periods of time by the winery or merchant selling
the wine, were designed. The cork now had to be fully driven into the neck of the bottle
for a leakproof fit. Corkscrews became a necessity.
   The early T-shaped corkscrew, with its simple handle and worm, spawned thousands of
design variations. Double-wormed, folding, left-handed, brush-tipped, and combination
corkscrews (walking-stick corkscrews, cigar-cutter corkscrews, and so on) were made of a
variety of materials: silver, gold, bronze, steel, gilt on copper, wood, mother-of-pearl,
ivory, horn, teeth, tusks, seashells, bone, and later, plastic. Decorative handle shapes knew
no bounds, from a cardinal’s cap to a woman’s legs.
   The flat, lever-type waiter’s corkscrew was invented in Germany in 1883, by Carl
Wienke, a civil engineer. Its convenient, fold-up design and concealed knife has made it
an artifact of virtually every restaurant in the world.

      “During one of my treks through Afghanistan, we lost our corkscrew. We
      were compelled to live on food and water for several days.”
                                                      — CUTHBERT J. TWILLIE
                                      (played by W. C. Fields) in My Little Chickadee

    A somewhat less popular corkscrew—actually more of a cork puller—is the Ah-So,
patented in 1879. Originally named the Magic Cork Extractor, the Ah-So has been so
called since the 1960s. The derivation of the name is unclear, although some speculate that
it describes the user’s surprise at how the device works. The Ah-So has no worm, but
rather two flat metal blades that are inserted down the side of the cork. This makes the Ah-
So especially useful when trying to extract a disintegrating cork with a crumbling interior.
In England, this cork puller was nicknamed the butler’s friend because it enabled a
disaffected butler to remove a cork, sample some of his master’s best, replace that with
inferior wine, and then recork the bottle with no telltale hole as evidence.
    The most important advance in corkscrew design occurred in 1979, with the birth of the
Screwpull, the first nearly infallible corkscrew. Invented by the late Herbert Allen, a Texas
oil field equipment engineer, the Screwpull’s extremely long worm is coated with Teflon,
so it glides without friction through the cork. As the worm descends, the cork is forced to
climb up it and out of the bottle, requiring no effort (or expertise) on the part of the puller.
    All good corkscrews have a helical worm with a thin, needle-sharp point. A helix is a
straight line wrapped around an imaginary cylinder. Thus, the center of a good corkscrew
is not its worm but the space framed by the worm. You can drop a toothpick into a helix-
shaped worm. Such a design means that as the point spirals down through the cork, the
rest of the worm follows the exact same path, minimizing damage to the surrounding cork
cells. Because the cork is basically intact, it does not shred as you pull up. By comparison,
a worm that is the central shaft of the corkscrew (as is true of most “rabbit ears”
corkscrews) plows a hole through the belly of the cork, ripping apart cells and causing the
cork to disintegrate into bits.
                        CORK: A FUTURE OR FAREWELL?
In a technologically advanced civilization, sealing wine with a hunk of bark may seem hopelessly archaic.
Indeed, cork has a growing number of critics. Yet the promising thwock as a cork leaves a bottle, a
familiar sound for centuries, may continue to be heard for decades to come—at least with some
expensive wines.
   Cork, the bark of the cork oak tree (Quercus suber), is native to the poor, rocky soil of southern
Portugal and Spain, as well as Sardinia, Algeria, Tunisia, Italy, and Morocco. Most top-quality corks used
today come from Portuguese trees.
   Cork’s structural composition is remarkable. A cubic centimeter of cork contains roughly 40 million
fourteen-sided cells arranged in rows and filled with a mixture of gases similar to oxygen. With a specific
gravity of 0.25, it is four times lighter than water, yet highly elastic, capable of snapping back to its
original shape after withstanding 14,000 pounds of pressure per cubic inch. Cork is impervious to air,
almost impermeable by water, difficult to burn, resistant to temperature changes and vibration, does not
rot, and has the ability to mold itself to the contour of the container it is put into (such as the neck of a
wine bottle).
   A cork tree is harvested, or stripped, for the first time when it is twenty-five years old, and thereafter
once every nine years. Although stripping does no permanent damage, the tree will need two years or
more to recover its vitality. A cork tree will be stripped, on average, sixteen times in its 150 to 200 years
of life.
   The stripping itself is grueling work. Using special wedge-shaped axes, workers peel four-foot planks
from the bark during the intense summer heat when the tree’s sap is circulating, making it possible to pry
the bark off. Once the bark is stripped off, it is stored in rooms with concrete floors (not on the ground,
where it could be contaminated by soil) and left to season and dry for several months. The bark is then
boiled or steamed to improve its elasticity and flatten it, and then dried again and left in a dark cellar to
dry out for three to four weeks. Finally, the bark is trimmed into rectangular planks and separated
according to quality and thickness. Wine corks are shaped from the planks, graded, and washed in a
mild hydrogen peroxide solution to remove dust, sanitize them, and lighten their color.
   Before the mid-1990s, most corks were washed in a chlorine solution. Chlorine, alas, can react with
moisture and fungi inside the cork to facilitate the growth of 2,4,6-trichloroanisole (TCA) and related
compounds, chemicals responsible for the “wet dog sitting on damp newspapers in a dank cellar” aroma
wine can pick up from corks. A wine tainted with TCA is said to be “corked” (see page 113). Although
chlorine is no longer used in cleaning corks, the problem of corked wines has not gone away, in part
because wineries use water to clean barrels and equipment, and municipal water contains chlorine.
Indeed, the average incidence of corked wine is now estimated at 2.5 percent. TCA can also be
generated by other means. Sometimes the compound exists naturally in raw cork bark. But it has also
been found in soil, inside barrels, on cardboard boxes, on wooden pallets, even just in the air—and from
there, it can contaminate corks, which in turn taint the wine.
   Today, cork’s future is anything but clear. While the Portuguese government has taken measures to
encourage improvements in cork manufacture and cork oak tree reforestation, wine producers around
the world appear to be increasingly fed up with the cost and loss of reputation associated with tainted
bottles. In response to the problem, a modern screw-cap initiative began in the Clare Valley of Australia
as far back as 2000, with New Zealand soon following. (Wines with screw caps do not get tainted by
TCA.) Today, about 45 percent of all Australian wine is stoppered by screw cap, as is 85 percent of all
New Zealand wine. Worldwide, the number of wine bottles with screw caps continues to grow.
          DOES WINE REALLY NEED TO BREATHE?

The idea that many wines soften and open up after breathing—being exposed to air—is
true. To effectively aerate a wine, you have to pour it into a large glass, carafe, decanter,
pitcher, or some other vessel so that it mixes with oxygen as it pours from the bottle.
Allowed to breathe in this way, the flavors of many wines—especially young, tannic reds,
such as cabernet sauvignon, merlot, nebbiolo, and petite sirah—will almost seem to
unfurl. White wines, too, will open up as a result of exposure to oxygen.
   Interestingly, this process of aerating a young wine is often called decanting, even
though true decanting is entirely different (see next section).
   Keep in mind that simply pulling the cork out of a bottle and letting the bottle sit,
opened, for a few minutes is not an effective way to aerate a wine (even though you often
see this done in restaurants). The amount of air in the tiny space of the neck of an opened
bottle is simply much too little, relative to the volume of wine, to have an effect—unless,
perhaps, you left it open for nearly a day. Of course, many devices on the market purport
to aerate wine perfectly. As of this writing, I have found that most of them jostle the wine
so vigorously as to discombobulate it. For me, the tried and true method of using one’s
hand to swirl the glass (at no cost whatsoever) is still the best.
   Also keep in mind that there are some wines that should never be aerated. These reds
are too sensitive to oxygen and, splashed into a carafe or decanter, will fall apart and taste
dull and lifeless. The wines that should never be aerated include older pinot noirs and red
Burgundies, along with older gran reserva Riojas (made from tempranillo) and older
Chianti Classicos (made from sangiovese).
      WHEN DOES A WINE NEED TO BE DECANTED?

Decanting a wine, a more complex procedure than aerating, means pouring the wine off
any sediment in the bottom of the bottle. So, in order to truly decant a wine, there has to
be sediment in the first place.
   Sediment—long, chain molecules of color and tannin that have precipitated out of
solution—is generally present only in older red wines (10-plus years old) that were once
deeply colored, such as cabernet sauvignon, Bordeaux, and vintage Port. If you carefully
take an older cabernet out of its resting place and hold it up to a light, you’ll often see a
sort of crusty material clinging to the inside of the bottle. That’s sediment. (It’s more
difficult to see the sediment in an old vintage Port, since many Port bottles are
traditionally made from dark, opaque glass.) Of course, you could drink an old wine that
has thrown some sediment without decanting it; the sediment is not harmful, just slightly
teeth-clinging.




Decanters can be useful for very old wines (which have thrown a sediment) or very young wines (to help “open up” the
                                             wine’s aromas and flavors).

   Decanting a wine is not difficult. First, the wine bottle must be placed standing upright
for a day or two to let all the suspended sediment gently settle to the bottom of the bottle.
Without picking the bottle up or turning it around, remove the cork slowly. Now pick the
bottle up and begin pouring the clear wine slowly into a decanter. It’s best not to shake the
bottle too much or tilt it back and forth as you pour. (Note: You can do this with the help
of a light source, like a candle or flashlight, behind the neck of the bottle, or not.) When
less than 2 inches of wine is left, you should begin to see sediment coming into the neck of
the bottle. That’s when to stop. The clear wine is now all in the decanter; the sediment
remains in the bottle.
   Exactly when should a wine be decanted? To be on the safe side, the general rule of
thumb is to decant older, tannic wines—vintage Port, cabernet sauvignon, Bordeaux,
Barolo, and Rhône wines, for example—less than an hour before serving. Decant it earlier
than that, and the wine may become tired and dull by the time it’s drunk.

                              CLEANING WINEGLASSES
        A wine that smells or tastes strange may be perfectly fine. The culprit could be (and
        often is) the glass. While glass looks perfectly smooth, the inside, examined under a
        microscope, looks like the surface of the moon. Bacteria and residue easily live in these
        microscopic pits, and these can react with components in the wine, making it smell
        stinky and taste odd. Additionally, less than perfectly clean glasses mean that sparkling
        wines and Champagnes will immediately appear flat and bubbleless.
           The best way to wash wine-glasses is by hand (I know, I know), using your hand (not
        a sponge) and a small amount of diluted soap and lukewarm water. Glasses should be
        rinsed several times in hot, but not scalding, water. Very hot water can cause the glass
        to expand rapidly and crack. Drain the glasses briefly upside down, then turn the
        glasses upright and let them dry in the air. Any drops or spots can be finished off with a
        clean, soft cloth. And once it’s dry, a wineglass should be stored right side up, standing
        on its foot, not on its more fragile rim.
           Interestingly, in Italy, in many homes and virtually all top restaurants, a washed
        wineglass is not yet considered ready for use. The Italians always pour a small amount
        of wine in the glass, swirl it around, then throw this wine rinse out—a process known as
        avvinare i bicchieri, preparing the glasses to receive the wine. A baptism of sorts.
 ARE SOME WINEGLASSES BETTER THAN OTHERS?

In a word: Yes. Although wine can be happily drunk from just about anything, from
Mason jars to Baccarat crystal, most wine drinkers would agree that a good wineglass can
heighten the pleasure of wine drinking and actually enhance the aroma and flavor of
wines. This is not just psychological. A well-designed glass allows the wine’s aromas and
flavors to evolve. Moreover, the wine itself will flow over the rim in a direct stream that
focuses it on the palate.
   How do you go about buying good wineglasses when there are dozens of glass
manufacturers to choose from, and prices for wineglasses can range from five to a hundred
dollars a glass? Here are some guidelines:
• BUY ONLY WINEGLASSES YOU CAN AFFORD TO BREAK. If spending fifty dollars per glass
means you’d never use them, buy less expensive ones.
• BUY MORE GLASSES THAN YOU THINK YOU’LL NEED. Glasses break. And besides, there
may be times when you want to serve two different wines side by side for comparison.
• NEVER BUY SMALL GLASSES. Drinking wine out of a small glass feels as awkward as
sitting on a too-small chair or eating dinner off a bread plate.
• CONSIDER BUYING ONE GREAT GLASS TO USE FOR BOTH RED AND WHITE WINES. A well-
designed, good wineglass—whether it will eventually hold red or white wine—should
have a generous bowl. An ample bowl gives the wine’s aromas and flavors room in which
to evolve. Closer to the rim, however, the bowl should narrow, forcing the aromas to be
focused toward your nose.
• BUY GLASSES THAT ARE ABSOLUTELY CLEAR AND SMOOTH, not faceted, to show off the
depth and richness of the wine’s color. Colored and/or cut glass may be beautiful, but you
cannot see the wine.
• MAKE SURE THE GLASS HAS A THIN RIM, so that the wine glides over it easily, and so that
you don’t feel like you have to chew on the glass to get to the wine.
• CHOOSE A GLASS WITH A STEM, to give you something to hold other than the bowl.
Holding the glass around the bowl can warm the wine. And besides, without a stem, it’s
almost impossible to swirl the wine in the glass.
• IN ADDITION TO REGULAR WINEGLASSES, BUY TULIPS/FLUTES for serving Champagne and
sparkling wines. The slightly tapered shape of a tulip/flute encourages a steady stream of
bubbles, and with these wines, bubbles are part of the pleasure.
         THE END… BUT REALLY THE BEGINNING

Whether you read Mastering Wine in its entirety, or flipped back and forth between
sections, I want you to know that you’ve just finished what I think is the most important
part of The Wine Bible. An intimate knowledge of anything necessarily begins with the
fundamentals of that thing. With wine, I’d even go one step further and say that the
capacity for pleasure—the capacity to be thrilled by wine—is ineluctably tied to
understanding it in all its most basic details. Anyone can drink good wines, and anyone
wealthy enough can drink super-expensive wines. But without knowledge, the soulful,
satisfying part of the experience is lost. All of this is by way of saying, Bravo! You did it.
This may be the last section of “Mastering Wine,” but it’s the beginning of many delicious
things to come.
   And now for the world of wine…
                                                                        FRANCE

   BORDEAUX | CHAMPAGNE | BURGUNDY | BEAUJOLAIS | THE RHÔNE |
     THE LOIRE | ALSACE | LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON | PROVENCE
FRANCE RANKS FIRST AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE FRENCH DRINK
AN AVERAGE OF 14 GALLONS (52 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

France produces more fine wines than any other country in the world. This fact alone has
elevated some French wines to almost mythic status. Indeed, French winemaking
techniques, viti-cultural practices, even French grape varieties have been adopted by wine
regions around the world. Like French food, French wine has been (and largely remains)
the benchmark against which greatness elsewhere is judged.
   But France’s impact extends even further. The country has molded the very way we
think about great wine. It was in France that the fundamental concept of terroir (the idea
that the site determines the quality of the wine) became pervasive and flourished (see page
17). Traditionally the French have been so convinced that nature and geography make the
wine that there has never been a French word for winemaker. Instead, the term commonly
used, vigneron, portrays man’s role as more humble. Vigneron means “grape grower.”
   France’s near obsession with geography (plus numerous episodes of wine fraud,
including cheap wine being passed off as more expensive wine) resulted, in the 1930s, in
the development of a detailed system of regulations known as the Appellation d’Origine
Contrôlée (AOC). This system designated those places where, today, most of the best
wines in France are made, and then went on to define how those wines must be made.
Given the emphasis on place of origin, most AOC wines are logically known by their
geographic names (Sancerre, Côte-Rôtie, Volnay, and so on), not by the names of the
grape varieties from which they are made (see France’s Wine Laws in the Appendix on
Wine Laws, pages 923–924).
                                          WORDS ON WINE
          While it’s tempting to assume that, when it comes to wine, the French invented almost
          everything, there’s one pursuit they largely overlooked: wine writing. For that, we first
          have to thank ancient Greek and Roman writers, then later, the English, for whom
          writing about wine has been a specialty for the last several centuries.
             The first book on wine in the English language was A New Boke of the Natures and
          Properties of All Wines, written in 1568 by William Turner. Turner’s book is thought to
          have been a guide for William Shakespeare, who laced his texts with numerous
          references to wine. Then, during the eighteenth century, dozens of major wine books
          were written—many of them, interestingly, by English physicians.
             In 1775, Sir Edward Barry’s Observations—Historical, Critical, and Medical—on the
          Wines of the Ancients and the Analogy Between Them and Modern Wines was
          published. The book’s engraved illustrations are impressive and the beautiful text was
          printed on a wooden press not unlike the one Gutenberg used for his bibles. Later, in
          1824, Alexander Henderson wrote A History of Ancient and Modern Wines, an opus
          devoted to French and German wines.
             For the next century and a half, most English writers shared Henderson’s view that
          no other countries need be included in a comprehensive wine book, since, as educated
          drinkers knew, fine wine wasn’t and couldn’t be produced anyplace else.

    Luckily for the French, their homeland is blessed with numerous locations in which
fine wines can be made. The first of these areas was established in southern France, near
Montpellier. Here, at the archaeological site of Lattara on the French coast, wine was
imported from Etruscan cities in central Italy. By approximately 500 B.C., the enterprising
French had established a small wine culture all their own. Later, with Roman help,
viticulture spread throughout what is now southern France. Indeed, Provence gets its name
from the Romans, who called it nostra provincia—“our province.”
   By the fifth century A.D., with the collapse of the Roman Empire, the vineyards of
France increasingly fell under the control of the Catholic Church. In particular, such
powerful monastic orders as the Benedictines painstakingly and systematically planted
vineyard after vineyard until vines stretched north beyond Paris.
   From the Middle Ages until the eighteenth century, the vineyards of France flourished
under the guidance of hundreds of thousands of monks. But the French Revolution of
1789 to 1799 forever severed the intimate relationship between the Church and the
country’s vineyards. Under the orders of Napoléon I, vineyards were ousted from Church
ownership and given away or sold, often to local peasants. In some areas where the
Church’s authority had been especially powerful (such as Burgundy) entire new systems
were developed for owning and inheriting vineyards. This included the stipulation that all
children must inherit equally (today, Burgundy’s small vineyards have been so
progressively divided that some family members now own mere rows of vines).

                                              SOMMELIERS
    During the French Renaissance, a sommelier (so-mel-YAY) bought the title and paid to become part of
    the retinue of the king or a nobleman. The sommelier, responsible for stocking food and wine for
    journeys, kept the provisions in a carriage called a somme. Simply stocking provisions, however, was not
    the sommelier’s most important job; ensuring the condition of the perishables was. He did this rather
    riskily, by taking a bite of each food and a sip of each wine before it was presented to his lord. If the food
or wine had been poisoned by an enemy, the sommelier was the first to know.
                                               COMMUNES
 The term commune is used in France to denote a wine village, as in Burgundy’s commune of Chambolle-
 Musigny, or Bordeaux’s commune of Margaux. But a commune in France isn’t necessarily only related to
 wine. In fact, communes are the lowest level of administrative division in France, and as such, the
 equivalent of incorporated cities in the U.S. Communes have revolutionary beginnings. Following the
 storming of the Bastille prison and the start of the French Revolution in 1789, the first commune—Paris—
 was created. The idea was to do away with the burdens of class and tradition and create a perfect
 society—one where everyone was equal, and reason, not tradition, ruled. Indeed, the word commune
 comes from the medieval Latin word communia, meaning “a small gathering of people sharing a common
 life.” The actual size of a commune, however, can vary from millions, as with Paris, to a dozen or so.
 There are currently close to 38,000 communes throughout France—and their structure remains largely
 the same today as when they were set up two centuries ago.

    Perhaps the most dramatic period in France’s wine history is the era it would most like
to forget. Sometime between 1860 and 1866, the deadly, root-eating phylloxera insect
arrived from America. The subsequent devastation it unleashed is thought to have begun
in the southern Rhône Valley. From there, the microscopic insect spread throughout the
country, throughout Europe, and eventually throughout much of the world (see box, page
30). Even after French vineyards recovered by planting phylloxera-tolerant American
root-stock, the country’s wine areas were never the same. Many French regions today are
half the size they were before the phylloxera epidemic.




  Vineyards are enclosed by hand-built stone terraces on the steep hillsides of Cornas in the northern Rhône Valley.

   The French take their food and wine very seriously. (The national school lunch
program consists of a four-course meal that ends with cheese!) Indeed, historically, under
the auspices of the Ministry of Culture, French schoolchildren have gone on field trips to
three-star restaurants in order to taste foods such as foie gras, Bresse chickens, Isigny
butter, and other famous french products, including, sometimes, wines.
 The Café du Palais is a favorite people-watching spot in the center of Reims in Champagne. Behind the pedestrians, a
 few of the café chairs are occupied by dogs, content to sniff the occasional platter of frites as waiters whisk by, mostly
                                                   with trays of wine.

   And, needless to say, the French are a proud people. Many of them spend their entire
lives drinking wine from their local area alone. (The word chauvinism, perhaps not
surprisingly, comes from the French.) Even today, it is not unusual to find Burgundians
who have never tasted Bordeaux or Bordelais who have never tasted a wine from Alsace.
And it’s not as though France is that big; the whole country would fit inside Texas.
Nonetheless, 204 different varieties of grapes are grown here and, with nearly 2 million
acres (809,000 hectares) (now, perhaps more) planted with grapevines, France produces
more wine than virtually every other country (although in some years, Italy produces a
tiny bit more).
   Climatically and geographically, France can be thought of as being divided into three
parts. In the north, such regions as Champagne and Burgundy have a continental climate,
with severe winters and cool, often rainy autumns, meaning that grapes may not fully
ripen, and thus produce wines that can be delicate and refined. By comparison, southern
France has a Mediterranean climate. Achieving ripeness presents little problem, and the
wines are fleshier, fuller, more “sunny” in the mouth. Lastly, on the Atlantic coast, the
wine regions of Bordeaux and the western Loire have a maritime climate. Here, the Gulf
Stream tempers what might otherwise be too harsh an environment, but again, rain and
humidity can present problems. There are some silver linings. Bordeaux’s muggy
summers, for example, make the great sweet wine Sauternes possible.

       “La vie est trop courte pour boire du mauvais vin.” (“Life is too short to drink
       bad wine.”) Tellingly, the French were the first people to assert this now
       common bit of wisdom.
     FRENCH WINE CULTURE BEGAN IN (MON DIEU) . . . ITALY
 The French may have been the undisputed masters of the art of winemaking for the past thousand years,
 but they learned it from the Italians. Indeed, startling research reported in 2013 suggests that French
 wine culture began about 600 B.C. when the Etruscans, a pre-Roman civilization based in central Italy,
 began shipping wine to southern France, and establishing a market for the beverage. The
 entrepreneurial French soon initiated their own winemaking industry by importing Etruscan grapevines
 and emulating Etruscan winemaking techniques (including mixing wine with basil, thyme, rosemary, and
 other herbs). For their part, the Etruscans learned about wine sometime around 800 B.C., from the
 Phoenicians (based in what is modern-day Lebanon), who themselves had learned how to grow vines
 and make wine from tribes in the area that, today, is Turkey. These tribes were the first to domesticate
 grapevines, more than eight thousand years ago.
    The research team that made the discovery was headed by Dr. Patrick McGovern, Director of
 Biomolecular Archaeology at the University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology,
 and the study was reported in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
    During the research, excavations at the ancient port site of Lattara (near Montpellier) in southern
 France unearthed well-preserved Etruscan amphorae, vessels used to transport wine and other goods in
 the ancient Mediterranean world. Using extremely sensitive chemical analytics, the scientists revealed
 that the amphorae contained the residues of wine, herbs, and pine resin (which was used to preserve
 wine during long journeys). Even more amazing was the discovery of an ancient limestone platform
 covered in wine residue—thought to be among the first French wine presses.

   About 90 percent of French wine is based on thirty-six grapes. The wines made from
these varieties run the full gamut from dry to sweet and from still to sparkling. And in
addition to wine, of course, two of the world’s most famous grape-based spirits are
French: Armagnac and Cognac (see pages 313 and 318, respectively).
   Notwithstanding the worldwide prestige of several French white wines, the French
themselves tend to drink red wine. Copious amounts of rosé are tossed down, too,
especially in summer. Indeed, more rosé is consumed (27 percent of all wine) than white
wine (16 percent of all wine).
   Unlike the wines of most other European countries, French wine is known in virtually
every corner of the globe. A thirsty traveler in Fiji, Nairobi, or Taipei can easily hunt down
a bottle of Champagne, even when all other wine possibilities seem exhausted. Of course,
the quality of French wine accounts for a good measure of its appeal, but so do various
historic and geographic considerations. France was the first European country to develop
significant international trade for its wines. This was possible thanks to the proximity of
most French wine regions to large, navigable rivers. As early as the twelfth century,
Bordeaux wines were being shipped down the massive Gironde Estuary and out to sea,
headed for England and Scotland.
              PDO, PGI–THE EUROPEAN UNION WINE LAWS
 Each wine-producing country has its own wine laws (you’ll find them in the Appendix on Wine Laws; see
 pages 923–930). But in Europe, somewhat confusingly, there are now two sets of wine laws: laws
 imposed by each country and, as of 2009, laws enacted by the European Union. The latter are applicable
 to all twenty-seven EU member countries, including the major wine-producing countries of France, Italy,
 Spain, and Portugal.
    It’s important to know that EU laws and national country laws exist in parallel and contemporaneously.
 For example, French wine regions continue to be governed by that country’s Appellation d’Origine
 Contrôlée (AOC) laws; Italy by the Denominazione di Origine Controllata (DOC) laws, and so on. But
 there are now concomitant laws, designations, and even graphic logos that apply to wines across the
 EU. The main EU designations for wine are:
 •PROTECTED DESIGNATION OF ORIGIN (PDO)
 •PROTECTED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATION (PGI)
   Wineries can choose to use either their national designations or the European Union
 designations/logos. Thus wineries from AOC areas such as Bordeaux or Champagne can use the term
 AOC or the European Union term PDO plus the PDO logo.
    Similarly, French wineries that have commonly been designated as vin de pays can now, at their
 discretion, use PGI instead. (To make matters extremely confusing, some producers that use the
 designation PGI invert the acronym to correspond with the local language. So in France, PGI is
 sometimes written as IGP, for Indication Géographique Protégée.) But even if a vin de pays producer
 chooses to stay with the term vin de pays, the PGI logo is now compulsory on the label.
   The EU’s goals—consumer protection and a single, unified system that identifies quality and origin—
 would appear to be sound. But for those who just mastered DOCG, DOC, AOC, DOP, and other national
 designations, adding two more possibilities—PDO and PGI—doesn’t seem (at the moment anyway) to
 make the picture a lot clearer.

   But France has given the world more than just her wine. From the seventeenth to the
nineteenth centuries, as the New World began to be colonized, French vine cuttings—
often from revered estates and châteaux—were shipped, smuggled, or lugged in suitcases
to South Africa, the Americas, New Zealand, and Australia. For the settlers of those
territories, French vines held out the hope that one day they, too, might bring into the
world a great wine.
   We’ll look at France’s most important wine regions in the order that, I believe, reflects
their importance and prestige, although Bordeaux, Champagne, and Burgundy could
arguably all be first in line.
BORDEAUX

Bordeaux—the word alone fires the mind with the anticipation of greatness. No other
wine region is more powerful, more commercially successful, or more important as a
source of profoundly complex, ageworthy wines. The challenge is to comprehend it all,
for this single region—the largest Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée in France—covers
more territory than all of the vineyard areas of Germany put together, and is three and a
half times larger than the vineyard acreage of New Zealand. In Bordeaux, some 8,650
growers and dozens of top-class estates—plus thousands more of lesser standing—
produce more than 661 million bottles of wine every year, including many of the priciest
wines in the world.
   While it makes stunning, long-lived white table wines and superb white sweet wines
(notably, Sauternes), Bordeaux is primarily a red-wine region. Nearly 90 percent of the
wine made is red.

      The name Bordeaux derives from au bord de l’eau, meaning “along the
      waters.” Bordeaux lies within the French region of Aquitaine, a word whose
      Latin roots mean a well-watered place.

   The range of red Bordeaux is astounding. At the most basic level there are scores of
utterly simple Bordeaux stacked, by the case, on the floor of any large wine shop. Wines
labeled simply Bordeaux or Bordeaux Supérieur fall into this category, and they can cost
$20 a bottle or so. At the most rarefied level, however, the famous Bordeaux we all hear
about—the First Growths and wines in their league—can be the apotheosis of refinement.
While these wines represent just a fraction of all of the Bordeaux produced, their
complexity and age-worthiness are legendary. As are their astronomical prices. Indeed, by
2013, the First Growths and wines in their orbit often cost up to $1,500 a bottle (and
sometimes more) for current vintages. This has effectively (and sadly) removed them from
the wine-drinking experiences of all but the most well-connected, high-net-worth wine
lovers. A generation ago, an upper-middle-class person—say, a university professor—
could have saved up and splurged on a First Growth once a year. Today, top Bordeaux
exist in their own realm, far outside the culture of normal wine drinking.
                    THE QUICK SIP ON BORDEAUX
   MORE THAN PERHAPS any other wines in the world, the top Bordeaux wines have set
   the standard for greatness and commercial success. They are renowned and sought
   after by collectors everywhere on the globe. In addition to these iconic wines, Bordeaux
   is the source of large quantities of every-night dinner wine.
   BORDEAUX’S TOP WINES are known for their ability to be elegant while still
   possessing concentrated, powerful flavors.
   BOTH RED AND WHITE BORDEAUX are almost always blends of two or more
   varieties. Blending is used to achieve complex flavors. Plus, growing multiple varieties
   that ripen at different times is a practical way of spreading the agricultural risk in
   Bordeaux’s sometimes difficult maritime climate.


“Terroir is a way by which man uses soil, vine, and climate to express a trait
in wine. Terroir isn’t a hierarchy for quality, but rather a mantle for the sense
of identity. This notion is a sensitive one in times of changing fashions. Wine
is diversity, and terroir is a real way to escape the monotony of daily life.”
                                      — JEAN-CLAUDE BERROUET,
   renowned French enologist and winemaker of Château Pétrus from 1964 to
                                                                    2008
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Just about halfway between the North Pole and the equator, Bordeaux is one of the largest
fine wine regions in the world—some 290,350 acres (117,500 hectares), encompassing
sixty different appellations. (For comparison’s sake, Bordeaux is six times larger than
Napa Valley and slightly more than four times larger than Burgundy.)
    The region lies along the path of three important rivers—the mighty Gironde Estuary,
plus the two large rivers that feed it, the Dordogne and the Garonne. To the immediate
west, just an hour’s drive away, is the Atlantic Ocean, and everywhere the region is
crisscrossed by small streams. All of this water has played a critical role in the wines
Bordeaux produces. Indeed, these waterways were partially responsible for the region’s
early success. As of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, barges would dock along the
wharves of the Gironde, ever ready to ferry wine to and fro between merchants and
ultimately to ships headed for England. This, at a time when most other wine regions in
France were relatively unknown beyond their own borders.
                              THE GRAPES OF BORDEAUX
                                                 WHITES
 MUSCADELLE: A minor native grape sometimes incorporated into modestly priced blends for its light
 floral character. Not related to varieties with the word muscat in their names.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: Major grape. Crisp, austere, lively. Has an herbal freshness. Usually blended with
 sémillon.
 SÉMILLON: Major grape. Dry and clean. Provides weight and depth and, with age, a honied character.
 Usually blended with sauvignon blanc. The primary grape for Sauternes.

                                                   REDS
 CABERNET FRANC: An important grape in Bordeaux, highly valued in blends even in small amounts.
 Often said to contribute aromatic intensity and notes of violets and spices. Especially important in the
 Right Bank communes of St.-Émilion and Pomerol. The only one of the major Bordeaux reds to have
 originated elsewhere. (Cabernet franc is native to the Basque region of Spain.)
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: The second leading red grape in terms of acreage, after merlot. At its best,
 intense, deeply flavored, and complex. Provides the framework and structure behind many of the top
 wines. Most of the wines of the Left Bank (the communes of Margaux, St.-Julien, Pauillac, and St.-
 Estèphe) are based on it.
 CARMENÈRE: Ancient Bordeaux variety (also known as grande vidure). The progeny of cabernet franc,
 but nearly extinct in Bordeaux today.
 MALBEC: Old southwestern French variety also known by its original name, côt. Planted in only tiny
 amounts in Bordeaux today, used to add touches of nuance.
 MERLOT: Bordeaux’s major grape in terms of production, constituting more than 60 percent of all
 planted acres. Along with cabernet sauvignon, one of the two main grapes in most blends. At its best,
 round and supple. Sometimes characterized as the flesh on cabernet sauvignon’s bones.
 PETIT VERDOT: A minor grape in terms of production, but even small amounts are highly valued in
 blends. Contributes vivid color, flavor intensity, and tannin.

   Most important, the rivers and adjacent sea (warmed by the Gulf Stream) act to temper
the region’s climate, thereby providing the vineyards with a milder and more stable
environment than would otherwise be the case. In addition, Bordeaux is edged on the
south and west by Les Landes—2.5 million acres (1,012,000 hectares) of manmade pine
forests that also help to shield the region from extreme weather. Were it not for the
maritime climate and the presence of these forests, Bordeaux’s vineyards would be at even
greater risk of damage by storms, severe cold snaps, and potentially devastating frosts.
   Many of the vineyards of Bordeaux—and especially of the Médoc, including Margaux,
Pauillac, St.-Émilion, and St.-Estèphe—appear quite flat. And they are, if one compares
them to, say, the steeply sloped vineyards of the northern Rhône, those of northern
Portugal, or most precipitous of all, the vineyards of Germany’s Mosel region. But
although it’s hard to see with the naked eye, Bordeaux does have gently rolling hills that
create variations in topography, orientation to the sun, soil, and drainage patterns.

                                                 CLARET
    The British often call red Bordeaux claret. The word comes from the French clairet, which originally
    referred to a light red wine (to distinguish it from Port). Today, of course, the top red Bordeaux are
    anything but light in color or in body.
   Drainage is key, for the grape varieties that grow in Bordeaux are very sensitive to too
much water, and water is everywhere around them. Thus, the best vineyards tend to be on
very well-drained soils of gravel and stone, and sometimes (especially in St.-Émilion)
limestone. In the Médoc, these deep gravel beds are frequently near the Gironde Estuary.
An old Bordeaux saying has it that the best vineyards “can see the river,” and not
surprisingly, if you stand in the middle of the vines at Château Latour, at Château Pichon-
Longueville Comtesse de Lalande, or at many of the other top estates, you can indeed
watch the boats moving up and down the Gironde.
   If the gods had been generous, every bit of Bordeaux would have been gravel and
stone. Unfortunately they were not, and it is not. Many Bordeaux soils are based primarily
on clay, which doesn’t drain water as well. As a result, clay stays cool in the spring,
delaying the vines’ budbreak and slowing the start of ripening. If the grapes are to ripen
fully and if the tannin is to be physiologically mature, the vines will need to make up for
this slow start by benefiting from lots of warm weather throughout the growing season.
Because of its slightly less tannic structure to begin with, and because it tends to ripen
early, merlot is often thought to have a better chance of doing this than cabernet
sauvignon. As result, merlot is often planted in areas with a high percentage of clay. Of
course, when clay is more abundant, being located on a good slope with significant
drainage becomes critical.
  In a moment, I’ll address the specific regions within Bordeaux, but first, here’s an
overview of the grapes.
   By law, red Bordeaux wines must be made from one or more of six red grapes: merlot,
cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, petit verdot, carmenère, and malbec. Merlot is by far
the most widely planted of these, constituting more than 60 percent of all the vineyard
land planted with red grapes. In Bordeaux, merlot is often described as fleshy,
mouthfilling, and supple. By comparison, cabernet sauvignon (which accounts for just
over 20 percent of vineyard plantings) is more angular and gives many of the great red
Bordeaux their framework, or structure. Structure comes principally from tannin, and both
cabernet sauvignon and merlot have considerable amounts. Tannin also acts as a
preservative in wine, which is why so many top Bordeaux can be aged for such long
periods of time.
France takes her marriages seriously. Here, Atlantic oysters, a traditional partner for exuberant white Bordeaux.
               THE MOST IMPORTANT BORDEAUX WINES
                                LEADING APPELLATIONS
         BARSAC white (dry and sweet)
         GRAVES white and red
         MARGAUX red
         PAUILLAC red
         PESSAC-LÉOGNAN white and red
         POMEROL red
         ST.-ÉMILION red
         ST.-ESTÈPHE red
         ST.-JULIEN red
         SAUTERNES white (dry and sweet)

                                APPELLATIONS OF NOTE
         CANON-FRONSAC red
         CÔTES DE BORDEAUX red
         CÔTES DE BOURG red
         CÔTES DE CASTILLON red
         CÔTES DE FRANCS red
         ENTRE-DEUX-MERS white
         FRONSAC red
         LISTRAC red
         MOULIS red
         PREMIÈRES CÔTES DE BLAYE red

   Together, merlot and cabernet sauvignon make up more than 80 percent of all the
vineyard land devoted to red grapes in Bordeaux. Cabernet franc (just over 10 percent of
vineyard plantings) is Bordeaux’s third most important variety, and all of the other reds
(carmenère, malbec, petit verdot) are planted only in tiny amounts, and together constitute
no more than 2 percent of red grapes grown.
   As far as genetics, all of Bordeaux’s red varieties appear to have originated in the
southwestern quadrant of France, except cabernet franc, which is of Spanish Basque origin
and was later brought to France. Cabernet franc is the father of merlot, cabernet
sauvignon, and carmenère (each grape had a different mother), while malbec is a cross of
prunelard and magdeleine noire des Charentes. For its part, petit verdot’s parents are not
known. For more on these varieties, see their descriptions in Getting to Know the Grapes
(page 53).
   For white Bordeaux wines, seven grapes are permitted: the main three—sémillon,
sauvignon blanc, and muscadelle—plus ugni blanc, colombard, merlot blanc, and
sauvignon gris, although these final four exist only in extremely tiny amounts and tend to
be used only in the least expensive wines. Of the important three white grapes, sémillon,
considered the soul of white Bordeaux, originated there and is the most widely planted.
With age, sémillon takes on a wonderful honey flavor and a creamy, almost lanolinlike
texture. Indeed, it is the high percentage of sémillon that allows legendary Bordeaux
whites, such as Château Haut-Brion Blanc and Château La Mission Haut-Brion Blanc, to
age so gracefully and deliciously.
    Then there’s sauvignon blanc, which, although widely assumed to have first appeared
in Bordeaux, actually originated in the Loire Valley. Only one of its parents—savagnin—
is known. Muscadelle appears to have originated somewhere in southwestern France,
possibly Bordeaux, and again only one parent is known—gouais blanc (interestingly,
gouais blanc is also chardonnay’s mother). Muscadelle is not related to any of the varieties
with muscat in their names.
    The fact that three red and three white grape varieties are widely used in Bordeaux (and
thirteen are actually grown and permitted) makes the practice and philosophy of
winemaking extremely different from that in Burgundy, Bordeaux’s northeastern neighbor,
where there is just one leading red and one white. For the Bordelais winemaker, blending
is critical. And while thirteen permissible grape varieties may seem like a lot, that number
is far fewer than in the past. As of the 1780s, for example, thirty-four red varieties and
twenty-nine white varieties could still be found in parts of St.-Émilion and Pomerol.




    Château Palmer, along with Château Margaux, makes one of the silkiest, most luscious wines in Margaux. The
magnificent estate, built in 1748, was bought by Englishman General Charles Palmer in 1814 for about $17,000 (15,000
                                                        Euros).


                             CHÂTEAU, CUVERIE, AND CHAI
     Three of the most important words in Bordeaux are château, cuv-erie, and chai. Though we think of a
     château as a palatial estate, anything can be a château in Bordeaux—from a farmhouse to a garage. The
     word simply refers to a building attached to vineyards, with winemaking and storage facilities on the
     property. Within the château is the cuverie (coo-ver-EE), the building where the wine will be made, and
     the chai (pronounced shay), the cellar where it will be stored and aged.
AN OVERVIEW OF BORDEAUX’S MAJOR REGIONS
Bordeaux is divided into multiple subregions. I’ve listed here the most important ones;
you’ll find sections on each of these later in this chapter. Keep in mind, however, that
Bordeaux has many less-well-known subregions from which come numerous delicious
wines that represent good value. These include Listrac and Moulis, Entre-Deux-Mers,
Fronsac and Canon-Fronsac, and the outlying districts known collectively as the Côtes.
We’ll look at each of these as well, although in less detail.
   Before we begin, there are two terms that are important to know: Left Bank and Right
Bank. To understand them, imagine you are standing in the city of Bordeaux, at the
southern end of the Gironde Estuary. Looking northwest (toward where the Gironde
empties into the Atlantic Ocean), all of the vineyards left (or west) of the Gironde Estuary
and the Garonne River constitute the so-called Left Bank. All of the vineyards to the right
of the Gironde Estuary and the Dordogne River make up the Right Bank. (In between
these lies Entre-Deux-Mers—literally “between two seas.”)
   Starting on the Left Bank of the Gironde Estuary and then moving southward in a big U
to end on the Right Bank, the most important subregions are:
MÉDOC AND HAUT-MÉDOC:      Together referred to as the Médoc. Inside the Haut-Médoc
(literally, the upper Médoc) are six communes, or smaller appellations. Four are famous.
Starting from the north and going south to the city of Bordeaux, they are: St.-Estèphe,
Pauillac, St.-Julien, and Margaux.
GRAVES:   Inside Graves is one famous smaller appellation, Pessac-Léognan.
SAUTERNES AND BARSAC
ST.-ÉMILION
POMEROL

   In the past, the wines from Bordeaux’s different regional appellations manifested
significant differences in flavor and texture. The wines of Pauillac, for example, shared
characteristics of soil and climate that made them taste quite different from Pomerol
wines. As is true in most places today, however, these regional distinctions have been
considerably blurred by modern winemaking techniques that have become nearly global in
reach.
In the impressive cellars of Haut-Brion, one of the top Bordeaux châteaux, barrels are never stacked but rather laid out
                                                     like showpieces.
                THE MULTIPLE CLASSIFICATIONS

Fasten your seat belt. Bordeaux is an amalgam of regional classifications that can seem
insanely complicated. To begin with, the classifications are different from one region to
the next, even though the terms used may be the same or similar. Thus, the words Grand
Cru Classé mean one thing in St.-Émilion, something slightly different in Graves, and
nothing at all a few miles away in Pomerol.
   What do the classifications classify? It might seem like an odd question, but it’s
important to know that in Bordeaux, the main classifications (those that apply in the
Médoc and in Graves) are based on the estate, not on the land (as is true in Burgundy).
Thus, when a famous grand château in either of these regions buys a neighboring lesser
château, the lesser château could be elevated to the higher rank. This is quite at odds with
the philosophy that terroir makes the wine, but it is nonetheless the way the Médoc and
Graves classifications are legally structured.
   Finally, before we tunnel down into the specifics of the rankings, it’s important to know
that the classifications are highly politically charged. The entire 2006 classification of St.-
Émilion, for example, was annulled in a tumult of legal action following the demotion of
some châteaux and the ascendancy of others. This is no surprise, for more than pride is at
stake. When a château’s ranking changes, the value of the property changes
astronomically, with a higher rank resulting in hundreds of millions of euros in added
value for the château owner. For example, in 2012, a Grand Cru property elevated one step
up to Premier Grand Cru Classé B status was immediately worth nearly ten times what it
had been just the day before.
   As for the classifications and rankings themselves, the classification of the Médoc was
the first and remains the most famous classification. It occurred in 1855 and is called,
logically enough, the 1855 Classification (see The Immutable 1855 Classification, page
151). It ranked sixty top châteaux in the Médoc, plus one, Château Haut-Brion, in Pessac-
Léognan, in Graves. The châteaux were ranked into five categories, from Premier Cru, or
First Growth (the best) down to Cinquième Cru, or Fifth Growth. (In Bordeaux, the
French word cru, translated as “growth,” is used to indicate a wine estate, vineyard, or
château. Thus a Premier Cru, or First Growth, is a wine estate of the top rank. The word is
the past participle of the French verb croître, meaning “to grow.”)
                    CLASSIFICATIONS: THE CHEAT SHEET
         Here’s a quick take on the confusing world of Bordeaux classifications. Each area has
         its own system as well as its own terminology. Unfortunately, wine labels don’t always
         indicate a wine’s classification.
         THE MÉDOC: In 1855, sixty châteaux in the Médoc and one château in Pessac-
         Léognan, in Graves, were classified from Premiers Crus (First Growths), down to
         Cinquièmes Crus (Fifth Growths).
         SAUTERNES AND BARSAC: Also classified in 1855. One château was designated as
         Premier Cru Supérieur Classé (Château d’Yquem), the next best as Premiers Crus
         Classés, followed by Deuxièmes Crus Classés.
         GRAVES: In 1953, and revised in 1959, the top châteaux in Graves were not ranked
         but all given the same title: Grands Crus Classés for their red wine, white wine, or both.
         ST.-ÉMILION: In 1954, the châteaux of St.-Émilion were classified, with the provision
         that the classification be revised every ten years. The top level is Premiers Grands Crus
         Classés, divided between an A level (the very best) and a B level. Below these two
         come the Grands Crus Classés. As a result of various amendments and annulments
         over the decades, the last revision was in 2012.
         POMEROL: Pomerol, as well as outlying areas such as Fronsac and Canon-Fronsac
         were never classified.

   The châteaux of Sauternes and Barsac were also part of the 1855 Classification,
although they were categorized differently. Here, the best château (there was only one—
Château d’Yquem) was called Premier Cru Supérieur Classé, First Great Classified
Growth. The second-best châteaux were called First Growths and the third-best, Second
Growths.
   (If you’re on the verge of skipping the next couple of paragraphs, I understand.)
   The wines of Graves, including Haut-Brion, were classified in 1953 and revised in
1959. (Because it was already classified as part of the Médoc’s 1855 Classification, Haut-
Brion today boasts two different classifications.) In both the original and revised
classifications, no hierarchical order was established. The sixteen châteaux recognized for
their red wines, white wines, or both were simply given the legal right to call themselves
Grand Cru Classé, Great Classified Growth.
Château Pétrus, unranked in the 1855 Classification because it was a Pomerol, is today one of the world’s most
                                              expensive wines.
    THE IMMUTABLE 1855 CLASSIFICATION AND THE FIRST
                       GROWTHS
The legendary treatise known as the 1855 Classification established four First Growths—the elegant
Château Margaux and Château Lafite-Rothschild, the powerful Château Latour, and the earthy, sensual
Château Haut-Brion. (As we’ll see, Château Mouton-Rothschild was added later.) Here’s how it
happened: In 1855, Napoléon III asked Bordeaux’s top château owners to rate their wines from best to
worst for the Paris Universal Exhibition, a fair. One imagines that the château owners cringed. The
prospect of rating the wines, one against the other, was nightmarish. The château owners stalled.
   Eventually, the Bordeaux Chamber of Commerce was invested with the job. There was no fretful
hand-wringing about terroir. The Chamber members ranked the châteaux based on one stark
quantitative measure: how much the wine sold for. The wines that sold for the most were called Premiers
Crus, or First Growths. The Deuxièmes Crus, Second Growths, sold for a little less. The system
continued down to Fifth Growths. In all, sixty-one châteaux were classified. The hundreds of châteaux
whose wines cost less than the Fifth Growths were apparently not worth bothering about and were not
classified at all.
  There was one other provision: The classification—clearly immutable as far as its authors were
concerned—was never to be revised.
   As you would expect, since that time, entire books have been written on the 1855 Classification and
the validity (or lack thereof) of its now-controversial rankings. For their part, château owners have, for
decades, reasoned that the market will ultimately establish value. And that’s what has happened. In
2009, for example, the electronic wine exchange company Liv-ex reclassified the top châteaux using the
same parameter—price—that was used in 1855. In the latest Liv-ex list (2011), Château Palmer, ranked
twenty-eighth in 1855 (a Third Growth) has moved into seventh position (it would be a Second Growth
today). Château Duhart-Milon, ranked thirty-eighth in 1855 (a Fourth Growth), would now be number
eleven (it would also be a Second Growth today). And, seemingly against all odds, Château Lynch-
Bages, ranked fiftieth in 1855 (a Fourth Growth), would now be number twelve (making it, too, a Second
Growth today). In addition to the three châteaux just mentioned, a slew of others have climbed up to a
higher rank, including Clerc-Milon, Pontet-Canet, Beychevelle, Grand-Puy-Lacoste, d’Armailhac, Cos
d’Estournel, and Ducru-Beaucaillou.
   An important footnote: One man did challenge, and ultimately change, the classification of his
château: Baron Philippe de Rothschild. Obstinate and relentless, he petitioned the government for twenty
years to upgrade Mouton-Rothschild from a Second Growth to a First. His persistence paid off in 1973;
Château Mouton-Rothschild was moved up to First Growth rank. The classification was thereby changed
for the first and last time.
   In the end, rankings and ratings are intellectually fascinating, but they remain temporal things. If the
1855 Classification has taught us anything, it’s that wines can soar above (and below) their historic
reputations. Rankings, in other words, can never fully replace the best evaluation method of all—tasting.
                                              FUTURES
 The most expensive red Bordeaux wines are commonly sold as futures. Under this system, referred to in
 France as selling en primeur, the châteaux set (much anticipated) opening prices for the wines produced
 each year. During the spring after the harvest, these wines go on sale for the opening amounts. The wine
 itself will not be delivered for another two or more years, when it is done aging and is ready to be
 released for the first time. For their part, châteaux get cash flow out of the deal, and customers—usually
 negociants, importers, and ultimately retailers, who may then in turn sell futures to their customers—
 secure wines they might otherwise not, at what is usually (but not always) a better price than if they’d
 waited for the wine’s release. Buying futures is, in effect, buying on speculation. In a global, fast-paced,
 wine-as-profitable-investment marketplace, some Bordeaux may be traded multiple times through
 middlemen before the wine even leaves the château. The system, well entrenched in Bordeaux for
 decades, exists virtually no place else. In 2012, Château Latour stunned the world by being the first top
 château to discontinue the practice of selling futures, saying it preferred to sell the wine directly to the
 consumer and only when it was deemed ready to actually drink.

   St.-Émilion was first classified in 1954, with the provision that the classification be
revised every ten years (this is not true for the Médoc or Graves classifications, which, by
current law, are never revised). In St.-Émilion, the best wines were termed Premier Grand
Cru Classé, First Great Classified Growth. The second-best were named Grand Cru
Classé, Great Classified Growth. Below that came Grand Cru, Great Growth. The top
level, Premier Grand Cru Classé, was further divided into an “A” group and a “B” group.
As of 2012, and in the midst of ongoing legal challenges, four wines are in the “A” league:
Château Angélus, Château Ausone, Château Pavie, and Château Cheval Blanc. All other
Premiers Grands Crus Classés are designated “B,” although these are still, of course,
considered above the Grands Crus Classés. The St.-Émilion classification in particular has
experienced considerable turmoil, including many legal battles that have resulted from
demotions made when the original rankings have been revised. In the midst of so many
classifications, the vineyards of Pomerol were, sanely enough, never ranked. For a
complete list of the Bordeaux châteaux classified in 1855, see the Appendix, pages 965–
967.
   Finally, it’s interesting and a little startling to realize that, even in those regions with
classifications, most of the châteaux within those regions were never classified. Which
brings us to the Cru Bourgeois.
   In the Médoc, there’s a collective name for the châteaux (now numbering 250 estates)
that were not classified. They are called the Crus Bourgeois du Médoc, and since 2010, a
new list of them is published each year by the Alliance des Crus Bourgeois du Médoc. For
the most part, Cru Bourgeois are extremely well priced. Today, a well-regarded Cru
Bourgeois, for example, costs the price of a First Growth, the latter, of course, being
stratospherically priced.




The vineyards of Château Mouton Rothschild. In 1855, the estate was classified as a Second Growth. But in 1973, thanks
to the relentless lobbying by Baron Philippe de Rothschild, the rankings were changed for the first and last time. Mouton
                                           was elevated to First Growth status.
                                   THE MÉDOC

The largest of the famous regions of Bordeaux, the Médoc starts at the city of Bordeaux (a
UNESCO World Heritage Site) and stretches northward like a snake for fifty miles along
the left bank of the Gironde Estuary. The Médoc is made up of two smaller appellations.
One is, confusingly, also called the Médoc (the northern third of low-lying land, near
where the Gironde empties into the Atlantic), and the other is called the Haut-Médoc
(literally the upper Médoc; the part closest to the city of Bordeaux and farthest away from
the Atlantic). It is in the Haut-Médoc, all at the river’s gravelly edge, that you find the
famous communes (villages) of Margaux, St.-Julien, Pauillac, and St.-Estèphe. Virtually
all the châteaux rated in the 1855 Classification are scattered throughout these four
communes. Farther inland are the Haut-Médoc’s two less important communes, Listrac
and Moulis. Here, away from the river, the heavier, less-well-drained soils often result in
less refined wines.
   Almost all the Médoc’s wines are red. The dominant grape is cabernet sauvignon
(forming up to 70 percent of all blends), followed by merlot. Both do well in the Médoc’s
stony soil, which, here and there, is interspersed with clay.
   Amazingly, the flat plateaus of the Médoc were originally marshlands—low-lying
semi-swamps badly suited to making any wine at all, never mind great wine. In the
seventeenth century, however, the Bordeaux nobility brought in Dutch engineers to cut
huge drains in the land, effectively lowering the water table and creating riverside gravel
banks. With the marshes drained, Bordeaux’s emerging class of wealthy lawyers and
merchants seized the opportunity to become significant landowners. Huge parcels of land
along the banks of the Gironde were purchased, grand estates were built, and a vine-
growing revolution ensued. During the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, many
of the most prestigious châteaux and vineyards were established, including Lafite-
Rothschild, Latour, and Mouton-Rothschild.
      The ancient cobblestoned streets of St.-Émilion. The medieval village is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.


MARGAUX
The southernmost and largest commune of the Médoc, Margaux (mar-GO) has more
classified estates than St.-Estèphe, Pauillac, or St.-Julien. The aristocratic Château
Margaux is here, of course, plus twenty other well-known properties.
    The soil in Margaux is among the lightest and most gravelly in the Médoc, giving the
best wines in the best years a sort of soaring elegance and refinement, plus wonderful,
generous aromas. Margaux are often described as being like an iron fist in a velvet glove.
It is this combination of power with delicacy that has given these wines their vaunted
reputation.
   The two most renowned Margaux are the First Growth Château Margaux, and the Third
Growth Château Palmer. In top years these wines can be superbly elegant, with long, silky,
hedonistic flavors. Other exceptional Margaux to consider: Château Rauzan-Ségla,
Château Lascombes, Château Kirwan, and Château Giscours.

ST.-JULIEN
Just north of the largest commune, Margaux, is the smallest, St.-Julien (SAN ZHU-lee-
ahn). It’s easy to drive right through it and not realize you’ve been there. Of all the
communes, St.-Julien has the highest percentage of classified growths—about 95 percent
of the wines here are Second, Third, or Fourth Growths, although there are no Firsts. If
you were to drink only the wines from this commune for the rest of your life, you could be
very happy.
   Among St.-Julien’s most well-known wines are the three Léovilles (Léo is from the
Latin leon, meaning “lion”): Léoville-Barton, Léoville-Las Cases, and Léoville-Poyferré.
All are classified as Second Growths and all are structured and intense, although in many
years, Léoville-Las Cases and Léoville-Poyferré in particular can broach First Growth
status.
   Like those of Margaux, the leading wines of St.-Julien are known for their precision
and refinement. Others not to miss: Château Ducru-Beaucaillou, Château Gruaud-Larose,
Château Branaire-Ducru, Château Langoa-Barton, and Château Clerc-Milon.

PAUILLAC
This word is music to the ears of Bordeaux lovers. Pauillac (POY-yack), just north of St.-
Julien, is where much of the excitement in Bordeaux is centered. Three of the five First
Growths are born in this soil: Château Lafite-Rothschild, Château Mouton-Rothschild, and
Château Latour. In all, Pauillac has eighteen of the sixty-one classified wines, including
many of the best.
   Pauillac wines can lean several ways. Some have a sort of full-bodied luxuriousness;
others, a bold structure; still others, a subtle, precise refinement. The best are always
complex, with rich black currant and cranberry flavors, often overlaid with cedary and
graphite notes. The range of styles within this commune is due to variable terroir and
marked differences among the châteaux in the composition of their blends. In the north,
Lafite-Rothschild sits on bits of limestone scattered through the gravel (its wine exudes
elegance). Farther south, Pichon-Longueville Comtesse de Lalande (often called simply
Pichon-Lalande) is situated on gravel and clay (its wine is often more fleshy).
                  IN PRAISE OF DELAYED GRATIFICATION
         No matter how delicious a young top Bordeaux is, it will almost always be more thrilling
         when it’s older, after it’s had a chance to evolve and reveal other facets and nuances of
         its personality. How much older? No one can say for sure. There is never one magic
         moment when a wine is ready. Most Bordeaux—most structured red wines—evolve and
         soften progressively. If they are very good, they usually go from being slightly tight to
         being supple and having a wider range of more complex flavors. But where a wine is
         along this spectrum at any point in time is a matter of conjecture. (And no matter where
         it stands on this spectrum, it will have its positive points.) Generally, the more structured
         the wine when young (i.e., the more tannin it has), the more slowly it will evolve. Since
         most top Bordeaux are very structured wines, they usually take at least eight or ten
         years of aging before beginning to soften and show more complex nuances. For a truly
         great Bordeaux, however, a good rule of thumb is to wait a decade before you think
         about opening it. Then add on another year (or however much you can bear) of delayed
         gratification time.

   If money is no object and one has the sort of access usually reserved for those in the
Fortune 100, then drinking one of the Pauillac First Growths is certainly the best
introduction possible to Pauillac flavors. But the cost of the Pauillac First Growths—in
2013, about $1,500 a bottle or more for a current vintage—effectively removes these
wines from many people’s “must-try” list. There are, luckily, many other very good
Pauillacs, including: Château Pichon-Longueville Comtesse de Lalande, Château Pichon-
Longueville Baron, Château Lynch-Bages, Château Duhart-Milon, Château Pontet-Canet,
Château Beychevelle, and Château Clerc-Milon.

ST.-ESTÈPHE
Stacked on top of Pauillac is the northernmost Médoc commune of St.-Estèphe (SAN es-
TEFF), known for wines that, at least by Bordeaux standards, have the staunchness of an
army general and a sense of ruggedness from the commune’s heavier soil, closer to the
mouth of the Gironde Estuary. (Many wines, as a result, are simply good, hearty Cru
Bourgeois.) Only a few of the very top wines—notably Cos d’Estournel (which is so close
to the border with Pauillac, you could hit a golf ball into the courtyard of Château Lafite-
Rothschild)—have captivating intensity and exquisite concentration and profundity of
flavor. Cos (the s is pronounced; the word is an old Gascon term for “hill”) makes a
blatantly sensuous wine (about 65 percent merlot), with waves of chocolaty, pipe-tobacco-
like, earthy, black currant fruit flavors that, when the wine is young, often seem to be
bursting at the seams. The Asian-inspired nineteenth-century château itself, with its show-
stopping copper pagoda roof and massive carved door, is one of the most intriguing in
Bordeaux. Other top St.-Estèphes to seek out: Château Calon-Ségur and Château
Montrose.
                                                GRAVES

South of the city of Bordeaux, Graves (GRAHV) extends like a sleeve dangling off the
arm of the Médoc. It is named for its famous gravelly soil, the gift of Ice Age glaciers. The
glaciers also deposited tiny white quartz pebbles easily found in all the best vineyards.




   Château Haut-Brion, the only estate outside the Médoc (it’s in Graves) to be ranked a First Growth in the 1855
                Classification. The wine has a distinct, complex earthiness and exquisite texture.

   Graves holds the distinction of being the only part of Bordeaux where both red and
white wines are made by most châteaux. The vineyards, some of the most ancient in the
region, were the first to be known internationally. Casks of wine from the region were
shipped to England as early as the twelfth century, and by the sixteenth century several
important estates were already established, including Graves’s most famous château,
Haut-Brion. Spelled “Ho Bryan” at the time, the wine it produced was praised by the
seventeenth-century British. A century later, Thomas Jefferson, third president of the
United States, wrote about how delicious “Obrion” was and purchased six cases to be sent
from the château in Graves to Virginia.
   So stunning was Château Haut-Brion that it was the sole Graves wine to be included in
the 1855 Classification. Powerful yet haunt-ingly supple, Haut-Brion has an almost
primordial earthy character. The other top wines of Graves were first classified in 1953
and the classification was revised in 1959.
  Within Graves is the appellation Pessac-Léognan. Many of the best red and white
Graves come from this area of ten tiny communes, grouped together by the French
government in 1987.
    Although many wine drinkers think of dry white wines when they think of Graves,
slightly more red wine than white comes from here, and in fact, about a dozen of the
region’s most stunning wines, all of which, incidentally, carry the Pessac-Léognan
appellation, are red. Cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and cabernet franc are all used
extensively. Château Haut-Brion has by far the most merlot (often as much as 45 percent)
and the most cabernet franc (sometimes up to 20 percent) of any of the First Growths.
   In addition to the voluptuous Château Haut-Brion, Château La Mission-Haut Brion,
Château Domaine de Chevalier, Château Pape-Clément, and Château Haut-Bailly all make
outstanding red wines, with rich, earthy, chocolaty, plummy, cherry, spicy flavors and,
sometimes, a very appealing earthy/animal quality.
   Classically, all white Graves are blends of sémillon and sauvignon blanc. From
sémillon comes richness, body, depth, and the ability to age with honeyed overtones. From
sauvignon comes sprightly acidity and a fresh snap of flavor. Indeed, simple white Graves
has undergone an enormous revolution in quality since the late 1980s, and the wines are
more concentrated as a result.
   But within Graves, a step even farther up are the top white Pessac-Léognan wines.
These range from very good wines, such as Château Carbonnieux, with its minerally
vibrancy and satiny mouthfilling texture, to outstanding. (White Pessac-Léognan wines
are considered the classic companions for the icy cold, briny oysters caught off
Bordeaux’s Atlantic coast.) Among the most outstanding, the whites of Château La
Mission Haut-Brion, Château Haut-Brion, and Domaine de Chevalier, for example, are
mind-boggling in their intensity and complexity, and with age, take on ravishing flavors
that are unlike any other white wines in France, indeed, unlike any other white wines in
the world.
                       SAUTERNES AND BARSAC

Quite a bit south of Graves, along the Garonne River, are Bordeaux’s five sweet-wine-
producing communes, the two most important of which are Sauternes and Barsac (the
other three are Bommes, Fargues, and Preignac). Sauternes and Barsac are not simply two
unique, small places within Bordeaux; they are among the few regions in the world
devoted to sweet wines. Sauternes, the more famous of the two, is about four times larger
than tiny Barsac, but the wines from each can be extraordinary. At their best, these are
wines with an apricotish opulence that detonates in your mouth and then spreads over your
taste buds like liquefied honey. The British wine expert Hugh Johnson has described them
best. Of one Sauternes, he wrote, “It was glorious in its youth; a creamy, stinging, orange-
scented, head-filling quintessence of pourriture noble. It is still awesome: now deep gold
and smelling of crème brûlée, but still racily potent and endlessly sweet.”
   Needless to say, it takes merely a sip of a great Sauternes or Barsac to create a convert.
The great examples are wonderful not because of their sweetness, however, but because of
their extraordinary balance. The best are luscious without being cloying, richly honeyed
without tasting like candy. To achieve this, the wines must have just the right acidity and
alcohol and must be complex.
   How is this done? Sauternes and Barsac are made mostly from sémillon and, to a lesser
extent, sauvignon blanc grapes left on the vine well into the fall, whereupon they usually
become infected with the benevolent fungus Botrytis cinerea, also known as pourriture
noble or noble rot. Sémillon, the leading grape in the area, is especially susceptible to the
fungus because of its large bunches of thin-skinned grapes with a high sugar content.

      Graves is the only region of Bordeaux where almost every château produces
      both a red and a white wine.

   Although it seems unlikely that grapes left to decay into furry, moldy raisins will
become magnificent wine, they can. In Sauternes and Barsac the process occurs naturally,
though erratically, by virtue of the region’s singular climate. For the botrytis fungus to
take hold on healthy, ripe grapes, the region must have just the right amount of humidity
and warmth (too little or too much can produce problems). Sauternes and Barsac, the
farthest south of all the important regions of Bordeaux, are ideally situated. Here, the
Ciron River meets the Garonne River, creating gentle morning mists. If all goes well,
nearby forests will help to hold the moisture in the air. When the day warms up and grows
drier, a perfect stage is set for botrytis to appear.
   As the beneficial mold punctures the grapes’ skins in search of water to germinate its
spores, the water begins to evaporate and the grapes dehydrate. Inside the shriveled
berries, the sugar in the juice becomes progressively more concentrated. The botrytis also
alters the structure of the grapes’ acids, but the amount of acidity in the wine is not
diminished.
                   Beyond a technical approach. Caroline Frey, winemaker of Chateau La Lagune.




Château d’Yquem, that ranked a Premier Cru Supérieur Classe in the 1855 Classification, is the only estate to be given
    this super status. D’Yquem makes what is arguably the best known sweet wine—Château d’Yquem Sauternes.

   The process begins in late September, but the rate at which botrytis takes hold is
unpredictable. In great years, the berries will begin to desiccate, forming a tiny amount of
liquorous sweet juice by late October. In other years, the process may be painfully slower.
Throughout, the château owner is sitting on pins and needles. First, he or she hopes for a
good warm growing season so that as fall approaches, the grape bunches are healthy and
ripe. Next, he prays for just the right balance of moisture, dryness, and warmth so that the
bunches will become botrytized as evenly and uniformly as possible. But the most nerve-
wracking part is the race against winter. Day by day as winter approaches, the risk of
losing the crop increases. One cold snap, one heavy rain, one winter storm could knock
the fragile berries off the vine, swell them with water, or freeze them before the botrytis
has fully taken hold. In each case the crop could be ruined, and the château could
conceivably be left with nothing. (About twice a decade, the weather is so borderline that
Château d’Yquem [pronounced dee-KEM]—of all the châteaux specializing in sweet
wine, the one ranked the highest in the 1855 Classification—chooses not to make any
sweet wine at all.)
   As the botrytis spreads through the vineyard, the château owner is keenly aware of its
growth pattern. Botrytis that takes hold sporadically means a difficult, laborious harvest,
for only perfectly rotted berries with concentrated juice can be picked and pressed. Grapes
only partially infected by the mold can give diluted juice or juice with funky off-flavors.
   Unfortunately, the fragile and erratic botrytis rarely reaches readiness at one moment
throughout an entire vineyard. To harvest each grape at perfect “rottenness,” therefore,
pickers must go into the vineyards four to ten times over the course of several weeks in
October and November, sometimes picking whole clusters, but sometimes picking
individual botrytized grapes out of the clusters. The cost of such painstaking repetition is
considerable. In the end, for the greatest of estates, like Château d’Yquem, the grapes
picked from one vine may ultimately yield just one glass of wine.
   The individually handpicked grapes and whole bunches are brought into the cellar.
There, they are pressed with great difficulty since the grapes are so dehydrated, and the
must is transferred into oak barrels, where it will ferment. Because of the concentration of
sugar in the must, fermentation is difficult and takes a long time—up to a year (by
comparison, a dry white wine generally ferments in two weeks to one month).
    During fermentation, yeasts convert the sugar in the must into alcohol (see How Wine
Is Made, page 37). As you know, a dry wine is dry because the yeasts convert all but the
merest trace of sugar into alcohol. With Sauternes and Barsac, the yeasts begin to convert
the sugar as usual. At a certain point, however, the concentration of alcohol is so great, it
kills the yeasts. Fermentation stops, even though there is unconverted natural grape sugar
left in the must. What remains, in other words, is a wine with leftover, or residual, sugar—
a naturally sweet wine. Sauternes and Barsac usually have 10 to 15 percent residual sugar.
                                     EATING SAUTERNES
 Sauternes is one of the most magical things you can drink—and (as it turns out) eat. Now, you may have
 yet to come across dark chocolate–covered, Sauternes-soaked raisins, and indeed there are only a
 scant few places (both in Paris) where you can get these little nubbins of hedonism. But get them you
 must. They will look innocent enough. But the minute you take a tiny bite and the mind-blowing flavor of
 Sauternes seeps into the luscious dark chocolate, well, this is when (as with everyone else who
 experiences them) your eyes will go wide and you momentarily won’t know what to do with yourself. I
 have been told that Parisians think it’s quite romantic to spend rainy mornings in bed, eating dark
 chocolate–covered Sauternes raisins with a loved one. You will have to test this for yourself.
    Only a few confiserie (candy shops) in France sell chocolate-covered Sauternes, requiring that you
 keep a close lookout for the delicious nuggets when you are in that country. For decades, the best of
 these (and a temple of gastronomy for anyone with a sweet tooth) was L’Etoile d’Or, in Paris’s 9th
 Arrondissement. (Alas, the historic shop closed in 2014 after a fire.) Today, luckily, a French shop called
 Oulala (sweet.oulala@gmail.com), sells them by mail order. Oulala indeed.

   These are not feeble wines. The sensory impact of a wine with 14 percent alcohol and
10 to 15 percent residual sugar is formidable. Plus, another factor comes into play: the
botrytis itself. When the grapes being pressed have been perfectly infected, the mold, as
well as the alcohol, can help kill the yeasts. As a result, the fermenting must may reach
only 13 percent alcohol before the mold and alcohol working in tandem destroy the yeasts
and cause fermentation to stop. At 13 percent alcohol, a sweet wine tastes more refined,
elegant, and in balance than it does at a higher level of alcohol. Thus, with Sauternes and
Barsac the finesse and complexity of the wines is directly related to how thoroughly and
uniformly the botrytis takes hold in the vineyard.
   Can you taste botrytis in the wine? An experienced taster can. The mold is not washed
off or in any other way removed from the grapes and bunches, and it does contribute to the
flavor. That flavor, however, is not like something that was left too long in the back of the
refrigerator. Botrytis adds an extra dimension, sometimes described as being faintly like
sweet corn or mushrooms, to the overall complexity of the wines.
Botrytized sémillon grapes about to be harvested at Château Lafaurie-Peyraguey.
                                           BON APERITIF
 The word aperitif comes from the Latin aperire, meaning to open, and indeed, a variety of fresh, slightly
 bitter drinks have traditionally been used to open both meals and appetites. More than mere cocktail-
 hour stimulants, however, wine aperitifs are also thought to be healthful because many contain minute
 amounts of quinine, an ingredient thought to have beneficial anti-inflammatory properties and one that
 was originally added to aperitifs to protect French soldiers from malaria (for most of history, French
 soldiers have been given—even paid with—considerable amounts of wine).
     Currently, one of the bestselling French aperitifs in the United States (thank you, James Bond) is Lillet,
 first created in 1872, when two French brothers blended white Bordeaux wine with a mixture of
 macerated fruits and a small amount of quinine. Today, numerous fruits—some of which are a well-kept
 secret—along with green oranges from Morocco, sweet oranges from Valencia, Spain, bitter oranges
 from Haiti, and cinchona bark (quinine) from the Peruvian Andes are cold-macerated in French brandy
 for four to six months before the brandy is mixed with wine and aged.
    Two types of Lillet are made: nonvintage, also called classic, and vintage, known as Jean de Lillet, the
 only vintaged aperitif in the world. Vintage Lillet is aged in newer oak barrels than nonvintage. Lillet
 Blanc, both vintage and nonvintage, is produced from Bordeaux-grown sauvignon blanc, sémillon, and
 muscadelle grapes. Lillet Rouge, whether vintage or nonvintage, is a blend of merlot and cabernet
 sauvignon.

   After a Sauternes or Barsac has completed fermentation, it remains in a cask for at least
two years of aging. It then goes on to age in the bottle. After thirty or more years, a top
Sauternes or Barsac can still be remarkably alive. Which is not to say you have to age
these wines for three decades. The wines’ honeyed apricot flavors are almost irresistible
when the wine is young, say, five years after the vintage date. But it’s only after about ten
years, once the obvious hit of sweetness has passed and the flavors have totally coalesced,
that the wines’ mesmerizing opulence comes into full force.
   In France, this vinous opulence is usually juxtaposed against a food that’s equally
intense and flamboyant. Historically, for example, Sauternes was often served with foie
gras—a hedonistic marriage if ever there was one—astoundingly, often as a first course
(in my opinion, making every wine and dish that followed pale by comparison).
    The wines of Sauternes and Barsac were the only ones rated, along with the Médoc, in
the famous 1855 Classification. One Sauternes was singled out and given the highest
rating of Premier Cru Supérieur Classé: Château d’Yquem. Yquem is still the ultimate,
richest, most perfectly balanced Sauternes. After Yquem, eleven châteaux are classified as
Premier Cru and fifteen as Deuxième Cru.
  Dry white wines are also made in Sauternes and Barsac, although they are not as well
known. Château d’Yquem named its dry wine Y (ygrec, pronounced E-GREK, the French
name for that letter of the alphabet). This set off a trend. Now, most dry Sauternes are
named after the first letter of the château’s name. Château Rieussec’s is called R; Château
Guiraud makes G. Dry Sauternes have an unusual, bold flavor. Made principally from
sémillon, they are very full-bodied, thick-textured, and relatively high in alcohol.
   Among the most exceptional Sauternes (and one Barsac) to try, in addition to Château
d’Yquem, are: Château Suduiraut, Château Rieussec, Château Climens (Barsac), Château
Lafaurie-Peyraguey, Château Guiraud, and Château de Fargues.
                                         ST.-ÉMILION

Like Pomerol, its soul mate nearby, St.-Émilion is not a part of the Médoc or Graves but,
instead, is on the other side of the Gironde Estuary, on Bordeaux’s Right Bank. It is a
region that, in every way, is as different from the Médoc as it can be. The vineyards of St.-
Émilion tend to be smaller than those in the Médoc, and the châteaux more modest. Often,
much of the work, both in the vineyard and in the cellar, is done by the proprietor and his
family.
   The first thing that strikes most visitors is the village of St.-Émilion itself. A small,
fortresslike medieval town carved out of limestone, it is by far the most stunning Old
World village in the Bordeaux region, and it, like Bordeaux city, is a UNESCO World
Heritage Site. In the center of the village is the twelfth-century Église Monolithe, one of
Europe’s only underground churches, carved by hand by Benedictine monks out of one
massive block of limestone. The church, which is quite large, is built on the site of a cave
said to be the hermitage of an eighth-century saint. Visitors to the church can see two
blocks of stone, each with shallow indentations, said to be the saint’s chair and bed. (A
local superstition has it that women who sit on the saint’s chair will become pregnant.)
   From the Middle Ages on, St.-Émilion was the home of several monastic orders.
Community life was extremely religious. All governing power was exercised by the
Jurade, a coterie of men given complete authority through a charter granted them in 1199
by King John of England. Part of the Jurade’s mandate was ensuring the quality and
prominence of St.-Émilion wine.
   Unlike the long, flat stretch of the Médoc, or the long, gently rolling landscape of
Graves, St.-Émilion has hillsides (the côtes)—limestone outcroppings and plateaus, plus
gravelly terraces. Over centuries of geologic upheaval, clay, sand, quartz, and chalk have
been intermixed there. The twists and turns and different soil compositions make St.-
Émilion, small as it is, a patchwork quilt of varying terroir. A fairly wide range in the style
and quality of the wines is the result. Merlot and cabernet franc are the dominant grape
varieties.

                                           THE JURADE
         The Jurade de Saint-Émilion, a fraternity of jurats, or aldermen, traces its beginnings
         back to 1199, when a royal charter issued in England gave local notables and
         magistrates the power to govern the region and its wines. Banned after the French
         Revolution of 1789, the Jurade was revived in 1948 as a wine brotherhood dedicated to
         the advancement and promotion of St.-Émilion wines. Twice a year, during the first
         flowering of the vines in spring, and again during the autumn harvest, the Jurade
         conducts a majestic pageant. Members, wearing flowing red robes, white gloves, and
         puffy red caps, proceed through the streets of St.-Émilion to a solemn, candlelit mass in
         the cloister of the town’s monolithic church. As part of the pageant, visiting dignitaries—
         princes, ambassadors, politicians, famous artists—are inducted into the Jurade. Alan
         Shepard, the first American astronaut in space, has been made a member, as has the
         cellist Mstislav Rostropovich. The Jurade tries not to take itself too seriously, however. It
         has also inducted the comedian Mel Brooks.
The Jurade de Saint-Émilion, a fraternal organization, parading in red robes through the cobbled streets of St.-Émilion.

   Only red wines are made in St.-Émilion, and the wine community is extremely
chauvinistic about them—there are more than fifty wine shops in the village! The pride is
justified; in very good years, the top wines can be positively riveting.
   Arguably, the very best St.-Émilion is the super-elegant Château Cheval Blanc. Along
with Château Ausone, Château Angélus, and Château Pavie, it is one of the four wines
designated in 2012 as “A” among St.-Émilion’s Premier Grand Cru Classé.
   Cheval Blanc has the highest percentage of cabernet franc of any well-known Bordeaux
estate—40 to 50 percent in recent vintages, with the remainder of the blend being merlot.
In great years the wine can have an almost unnerving texture—it is, all at the same time,
deep, luxuriant, and kinetically alive in the mouth. When young, the wine fairly oozes
with decadent blackberry fruit laced with vanilla, rather like eating a bowl of squashed,
ripe blackberries drizzled with crème anglaise. (One of the greatest Bordeaux—indeed,
one of the greatest wines—I have ever drunk was a 1947 Cheval Blanc, considered among
the most majestic wines Bordeaux produced in the twentieth century.)
   The vineyard of Cheval Blanc is on a mostly gravelly terrace several miles north of St.-
Émilion, almost in Pomerol. However, many of the châteaux producing the best St.-
Émilion are those on the southwestern limestone hillsides hugging the village. Château
Ausone, Château Canon, Château Magdelaine, and Château Pavie are all here. In addition
to wines from these vineyards, some others to try include: Château La Dominique,
Château Figeac, Château Trotte Vieille, Château l’Arrosée, and Château Troplong
Mondot.
                                              POMEROL

The tiniest of all the major Bordeaux wine regions, Pomerol has definite cachet. This
wasn’t always so. The area was obscure and the wines were unknown in the nineteenth
century (and were not ranked in the 1855 Classification). At the turn of the twentieth
century, Pomerol’s wines were considered merely average. The region’s current fame is
based, in part, on the ascendency of Château Pétrus, which produces Pomerol’s most
famous, expensive, and sought-after wines. Often ravishing, opulent, and complex, it sets
the aesthetic criteria for other Pomerols.
   Like its neighbor, St.-Émilion, Pomerol is on the Right Bank of the Gironde Estuary.
The wines here are exclusively red, and the majority are based on merlot and cabernet
franc. Merlot alone accounts for more than 80 percent of all the grapes planted in Pomerol,
and not surprisingly, it is extremely well suited to the region’s gravel and clay beds.
Cabernet sauvignon is rarely part of a Pomerol blend.
   Pomerols from the best sites stand out with a velvetlike texture and a plum/cocoa/violet
richness. This is Bordeaux’s harmonic convergence of intensity and elegance at its best.
Their relative softness make Pomerols fairly easy to drink young.

                         LOCATION, LOCATION, LOCATION
    Pomerol and St.-Émilion remained far less well known than the Médoc even after the first bridges over
    the Gironde Estuary and the Garonne and Dordogne rivers were built in the mid-1800s. Wine estates in
    the two regions were small; no château had an established, bankable reputation; and for Bordeaux’s wine
    brokers, it was difficult to get to these inland vineyards and even harder to transport the wine out. It made
    much more sense for the brokers to do business with the larger, well-known Médoc châteaux in Margaux,
    Pauillac, St.-Julien, and St.-Estèphe, which were also far more accessible thanks to their proximity to the
    Gironde Estuary just north of the city of Bordeaux.

   As noted, Pomerol was, until the 1980s, a fairly unknown region that only began to
emerge from its obscurity in the 1940s and 1950s. It was then that Jean-Pierre Moueix, a
talented businessman with a keen palate, began buying exclusive sales and marketing
rights to Pomerol’s best châteaux. In 1964, he bought a 50-percent share of what was to
become the most prized property of all, Pétrus.
   Improving quality was an obsession for Moueix. Soon, news of the supple, rich,
plummy character of the wines under his direction spread by word of mouth. By the mid-
1960s, Pomerols began to develop a cult following among collectors. Today, the firm is
headed by Jean-Pierre Moueix’s son Christian. In addition to the portfolio of Moueix
wines in Pomerol and in neighboring Fronsac, Moueix owns Dominus, a top estate in the
Napa Valley of California.
   The tiny town of Pomerol encompasses the square around the small church and not
much more. Similarly, most Pomerol properties are small, especially compared to those in
the Médoc. In general, a proprietor here owns a vineyard less than 10 acres (4 hectares) in
size, and eighty Pomerol châteaux have fewer than 2 acres (under 1 hectare). By
comparison, vineyards in the Médoc span dozens and sometimes hundreds of
acres/hectares. Finally, Pomerol châteaux are extremely modest; there are no breathtaking
mansions.
    If price and availability were indeed no object, the Pomerol we should all experience
would be Pétrus. In the best vintages, the wine’s exotic aromas of licorice and rich fruits
leap out of the glass, after which, a creamy, black raspberry explosion fills your mouth. It
is hard to imagine a more luxurious red wine, where each of the components is so
seamlessly integrated into the whole.
   But Pétrus aside, there are a number of other terrific, seductive Pomerols.
Unfortunately, many of these are, like Pétrus, made in small quantities and thus hard to
find. Nonetheless, among the ones to seek out: Château Le Pin, Château La Fleur de Gay,
Château Lafleur, Château L’Évangile, Château La Conseillante, Château Certan de May,
and Château Trotanoy.
                 OTHER REGIONS OF BORDEAUX

The less-important wine districts of Bordeaux are less important for a good reason.
Without the benefit of coming from the best terroirs, much of the wine made there is
simply simplistic. That said, some wines are definitely diamonds in the rough. And,
importantly, the regions that follow are good hunting grounds for wines that don’t give
you sticker shock.
   I’ll begin with Listrac and Moulis, which are the other regions of the Médoc, and then
move on to Entre-Deux-Mers, east and south of the city of Bordeaux, over to Fronsac and
Canon-Fronsac, near Pomerol, and finally to the Côtes. There are many other outlying
districts making simple, good table wines (Entre-Deux-Mers-Haut-Benauge, Lussac-St.-
Émilion, Montagne-St.-Émilion, Lalande de Pomerol, Puisseguin-St.-Émilion, Ste.-Foy-
Bordeaux, and St.-Georges-St.-Émilion), plus a number of outlying appellations producing
mostly sweet wines—Cadillac, Cérons, Côtes de Bordeaux-Saint-Macaire, Loupiac, and
Ste.-Croix-du-Mont among them. Yet the districts below have, I think, a bit better track
record for making wines worthy of discovery.
                              IF MONEY WERE NO OBJECT
 Let’s say you were willing to pay $20,000 to $36,000 per case for Château Pétrus (the cost for
 contemporary vintages). How would you go about buying it? Alas, the process wouldn’t be easy—Pétrus
 is rarely available. Here’s why.
    Each year, 2,500 to 3,000 cases of Pétrus are made. In the United States, as one example, about four
 hundred of these cases are allocated to Pétrus’s United States importer. The importer, in turn, offers the
 wine to a small, select group of wholesalers around the country who have consistently bought Pétrus in
 the past. These wholesalers, in turn, offer their limited allotments only to a small, select group of
 exclusive wine shops and a few prestigious restaurants that have seniority based on their past record of
 purchases.
    A wine shop or restaurant will offer the wine, often personally, to a select group of customers, mostly
 collectors who buy Pétrus every year regardless of the cost.
    It can be next to impossible to break into this loop.



LISTRAC AND MOULIS
Listrac and Moulis are inland communes of the Médoc, that is, they are not positioned on
the gravelly banks of the Gironde Estuary like their more famous sisters, Margaux, St.-
Julien, Pauillac, and St.-Estèphe. Away from the riverbanks, the soil tends to be heavier
and to hold more water. As a result, the wines of Listrac and Moulis (based on cabernet
sauvignon, with merlot and cabernet franc added) are generally rougher-textured and less
polished, but also a fraction of the cost. They can sometimes seem straitjacketed by tannin.
There are exceptions. Several of the best Crus Bourgeois, for example, are here, including
Château Poujeaux, Château Chasse-Spleen, and Château Fourcas-Hosten.

ENTRE-DEUX-MERS
Entre-Deux-Mers (literally “between two seas”) is the vast expanse of rolling hills and
forested land between the Dordogne and Garonne tributaries of the Gironde Estuary.
Although it is a large wine region and a picturesque one, the wines are generally very
simple and are never as high in quality as the wines of the Médoc, Graves, Pomerol, or
St.-Émilion.
   It’s important to know that the appellation Entre-Deux-Mers applies to dry white wines
only. These are primarily sauvignon blanc, sometimes with a bit of sémillon and
muscadelle, which adds a faint spicy-flowery quality. They are fresh, zesty, and light—
perfect for pairing with fish and shellfish, or just for plain pleasure. A significant amount
of red wine is made here, too, but because these wines are often lower in quality than the
region’s whites, they must carry the appellation Bordeaux or Bordeaux Supérieur, not
Entre-Deux-Mers.
      The wine harvest at Château Figeac. Everyone—young and old; male and female—helps with the work.

  Entre-Deux-Mers wines have never been classified. Among the Entre-Deux-Mers
worth seeking out are: Château Bonnet, Château Turcaud, Château Nardique la Gravière,
Château de Camarsac, and Château Peyrebon.

FRONSAC AND CANON-FRONSAC
Over the past decade Fronsac and Canon-Fronsac have gained some momentum and risen
out of “lesser-dom” into greater recognition. The two communes are spread over the
hillsides just north and slightly west of Pomerol and St.-Émilion, and they sometimes
share a similar topography with their famous cousins, as well as clay/sand soils interlaced
with limestone. At their best, the wines can be full of black raspberry flavors and have a
kind of edgy power and rusticity.
    The wines are all red. Merlot is the dominant grape, followed by cabernet franc, with a
bit of cabernet sauvignon sometimes blended in for strength and balance.
   This is similar to the grape profile in St.-Émilion and Pomerol, yet the wines from
Fronsac and Canon-Fronsac tend to be far more rustic. Among the wines worth seeking
out: Château La Vieille-Cure and Château Dalem.

THE CÔTES
Outlying the four communes of Pomerol, St.-Émilion, Fronsac, and Canon-Fronsac are a
handful of satellite regions called the côtes (hillsides): the Côtes de Bourg, Côtes de
Castillon, Côtes de Francs, and Premières Côtes de Blaye. With the 2008 vintage, these
wines were also allowed to use the broader, simpler name Côtes de Bordeaux if they
preferrred.
                                        SECOND IN LINE
 To make the best possible wine, a top château will blend together only its very finest lots of wine. These
 generally come from the most mature and well-sited vineyard plots. What happens to all the other wine?
 In many cases, the château makes a second wine, which will have its own brand name and its own
 distinct label. (A second wine is different from a Second Growth.)
    A second wine is usually made by the same winemaker in essentially the same manner as the famous
 wine, and it will usually come from the same vineyard, although the age of the vines will generally be
 younger. Although the second wine may not be as complex or ageworthy as the grand vin, it will also be
 a lot less expensive. Of course, for many experienced wine drinkers, the second wine of a great château
 like Château Lafite-Rothschild may be preferable to the top wine from a far less well-known château.
     Châteaux rarely promote their second wines, preferring to be known for their famous ones. Often, the
 label on a second wine does not reveal the château it came from, but the name may be close enough to
 tell.
    Some of the best second wines and the châteaux they come from:
 LE CARILLON DE L’ANGÉLUS (Château Angélus)
 CARRUADES DE LAFITE (Château Lafite-Rothschild)
 LE CLARENCE DE HAUT-BRION (Château Haut-Brion)
 CLOS DU MARQUIS (Château Léoville-Las Cases)
 LA CROIX DE BEAUCAILLOU (Château Ducru-Beaucaillou)
 ECHO DE LYNCH-BAGES (Château Lynch-Bages)
 LES FORTS DE LATOUR (Château Latour)
 LES PAGODES DE COS (Château Cos d’Estournel)
 PAVILLON ROUGE DU CHÂTEAU MARGAUX (Château Margaux)
 LE PETIT CHEVAL (Château Cheval Blanc)
 RESERVE DE LA COMTESSE (Château Pichon-Longueville Comtesse de Lalande)

   The rural, hilly côtes are some of the oldest wine regions in Bordeaux. Vines were
planted here by the Romans. The wines are mostly reds for everyday drinking—medium-
bodied and juicy when they are good, shallow when they are not. Merlot is the leading
grape variety, but côtes wines very rarely have the plummy depth and lushness of merlot
planted in, say, Pomerol or St.-Émilion. Often, this is due to the fact that the grapes are
planted in more fertile soil and harvested at higher yields.
   Among the best red côtes are Château Puygueraud (Côtes de Francs), Château Roc de
Cambes (Côtes de Bourg), Château Les Jonqueyres (Côtes de Blaye), and Château de
Francs (Côtes de Francs).
              SWEET SUCCESS: MACARONS AND CANELÉS
Who would imagine that two of the famous food specialties in the world’s most prestigious wine region
are a chewy cookie and a miniature, cakelike sweet? What’s more, no one seems to know how these
simple items became so legendary. Nonetheless, you have not truly experienced Bordeaux until you go
on an expedition in search of the ultimate example of each.
    Macarons won’t present a problem. These almond cookies, thought to date from the early 1600s, are
a specialty of just one place: the ancient walled village of St.-Émilion. Virtually every pâtisserie in the
village sells them.
    Then there are canelés, which are often eaten accompanied by a glass of red wine on a Sunday
afternoon. If anything can drive a Bordeaux pastry chef to fits of fanaticism, these homey, much-loved
sweets can, for they are a challenge to make perfectly (and easy to make poorly). Nonetheless, virtually
all top Bordelais pastry chefs are members of the Confrérie du Canelé de Bordeaux, an organization of
pâtissiers devoted to the tradition of baking them.
   A canelé looks like a molded cream puff. The center is sort of custardy; the outside, crunchy and
caramelly. But a canelé is not a pastry per se, not a cookie, and not really a cake either. If they weren’t
French, canelés would be perfect as part of English afternoon tea. The confection’s origin is not clear,
although one historical account suggests that the first canelé may have been baked by a nun who
accidentally overcooked her pastry cream sometime in the thirteenth century.




Chewy yet delicate macarons, a specialty of St.-Émilion, were created sometime in the 17th century and now come in
                                                  myriad flavors.
                            THE FOODS OF BORDEAUX

Bordeaux may have many of France’s most impressive wines but, on the whole, it comes
nowhere close to having France’s most impressive food. Admittedly, describing French
food, any morsel of it, as less than stellar seems gastronomically sacrilegious. After all,
French food at its lowest ebb is still French food. And so goes the cooking in Bordeaux. It
is French; it is good. Yet, the paradox is nagging. How can a region of France produce
wine so incredibly inspired and food that, for the most part, is so incredibly “un”?
   My first suspicion that Bordeaux might not be as electrifying culinarily as enologically
came while dining at a renowned château. The regal eighteenth-century dining room was
dominated by a 20-foot-long table on which rested heirloom silver and three antique
crystal decanters containing some of the château’s older vintages. Dinner consisted of
potatoes, green beans, and chicken.




Not cookies exactly; not cakes; not pastries, canelés are the star “sweet” of Bordeaux, often nibbled with a glass of red
                                                     wine alongside.

   Potatoes, green beans, and chicken? To be sure, these were delicious, waxy French
potatoes, pencil-thin haricots verts, and chicken that was scrumptious. But still.
   When I asked why Bordeaux had such simple food compared to other parts of France,
several hypotheses were suggested. The first was that cooking in Bordeaux is partly
Anglo-Saxon in orientation, thanks to the long-standing, deep ties between the Bordelais
and the British. In fact, for three centuries, beginning with the marriage of Eleanor of
Aquitaine to Henry II in 1152, the people of Bordeaux considered themselves citizens of
England, not France. The bonds that formed were so strong that, to this day, Britain
remains one of Bordeaux’s most important markets, and a large percentage of château
owners speak flawless English.
   Several Bordelais, however, rejected this theory. The simple cooking of Bordeaux, they
said, reflected the region’s close-knit, hardworking, conservative families who prefer
locally grown, unadorned cooking. By way of evidence, they pointed out that many of the
best restaurants in the region are the simplest ones that serve local specialties like lamprey
(large, fatty, eel-like fish caught from nearby rivers and usually baked in casseroles, often
with red wine), or—more appealingly—roast lamb. Indeed, before the 1970s, sheep were
often taken from the rural areas ringing Bordeaux to graze over the winter in the vineyards
of Pauillac, St.-Julien, St.-Estèphe, and Margaux. There, they would feed on the grasses
that grew between the rows of vines—grasses said to give their meat an especially
delicious flavor. And there, too, among the dormant vines, lambs would be born.

                         WHEN YOU VISIT… BORDEAUX
         BORDEAUX IS A VERY LARGE REGION, and traffic—especially near the cities—can
         be staggering. Concentrate your visits day by day in a given area (today Pomerol,
         tomorrow Graves, and so on).
         STAYING IN BORDEAUX CITY? Check out the charming Le Boutique Hotel Bordeaux.
         Housed in an eighteenth-century UNESCO World Heritage building, this gem boasts
         everything luxe right down to the Hermès bath amenities. Out in the country, one of the
         most impressive hotels is Cordeillan-Bages (cordeillanbages.com) which is housed in a
         seventeenth-century mansion. The hotel’s wines are made at Château Lynch-Bages.
         FOR A BREAK FROM WINE TASTING, the spa at Château Smith Haut Lafitte is
         famous for its relaxing treatments, including spa products made with extracts from local
         grapes.
         BORDEAUX TENDS TO BE a somewhat formal region. Leave the shorts and flip-flops
         home.
         AN ADVANCE APPOINTMENT (not to mention your best manners) are essential.
         FINALLY, don’t miss a meal at La Tupina, the legendary restaurant in Bordeaux’s old
         quarter. Besides the roast chicken (acclaimed by many as the best roast chicken in
         France), the must-have specialties include hand-cut potatoes deep-fried in duck fat,
         and country French bread soaked in chicken fat, then fried. You only live once.
                        The Bordeaux Wines to Know
I won’t include any of the First Growths here, although in great vintages they are all truly stunning experiences.
There are wines like the 1966 Château Latour, or the 2000 Château Margaux, that, for me, had such beauty they
were impossible to believe. But those are (and should be) rare experiences, and they are surely rare opportunities.
So here are some other incredible wines. Admittedly, most, like all great Bordeaux, are still expensive and much in
demand.

                                                   WHITES




                                    CHÂTEAU CARBONNIEUX
                                PESSAC-LÉOGNAN | GRAND CRU CLASSÉ
                              Approximately 75% sauvignon blanc, 25% sémillon
This is one of the great classic white Pessac-Léognans, and because it is relatively affordable, you see the bottle,
wet and chilled, being opened next to huge platters of iced local oysters in brasseries all over Bordeaux. Very good
white Bordeaux like Carbonnieux has a distinctive, smooth, broad texture—it reminds me of the feel of cool cotton
sheets on a hot night. The aromas and flavors are completely atypical of so much white wine drunk today—they
evoke chamomile tea, dried flowers, hay, nuts, beeswax, minerals, and the flavor (but not the sweetness) of honey.
Château Carbonnieux was founded in the thirteenth century by the Benedictine monks of the Abbey of Sainte-
Croix, and is among the oldest châteaux in Bordeaux.
                                            DOMAINE DE CHEVALIER

                                  PESSAC-LÉOGNAN | GRAND CRU CLASSÉ
                                        70% sauvignon blanc, 30% sémillon
If there were only ten wines left to drink in the world, I’d want this to be one of them. It is, for me, a wine of great
sophistication, a wine that ignites imagination and emotion. Once, I wrote about Domaine de Chevalier that
drinking it was “like being washed out to sea; your senses exquisitely alive with the freshness of the ocean air; the
purity of the sunlight, the saline taste of the minerally sea-water.” With age, Domaine de Chevalier takes on a
honeyed complexity that even honey would envy. The estate is one of the few in Bordeaux to be called a domaine
rather than a château.
                                   CHÂTEAU LA MISSION HAUT-BRION

                                PESSAC-LÉOGNAN | GRAND CRU CLASSÉ
                             Approximately 80% sémillon, 20% sauvignon blanc
Bordeaux has but a handful of regal white wines. This is my vote for the best of them. Racy yet sublime, elegant,
and deeply complex, La Mission Haut-Brion is one of the world’s most stunning examples of the mesmerizing
richness that can be achieved by blending exquisite-quality sémillon and exquisite-quality sauvignon blanc. The
white wine has existed only as of the 2009 vintage (before that, the estate produced only its stupendous red). The
white was made possible when the grapes that had been used to make Laville Haut-Brion wine henceforth were
designated for La Mission Haut-Brion Blanc (and the Laville wine ceased to exist). Given the near perfection of
both its red and white wines, La Mission Haut-Brion has often been named as an estate that deserves to move to
First Growth status (as Mouton-Rothschild did in 1973). The château is owned by Domaine Clarence Dillon, which
also owns Château Haut-Brion.

                                                    REDS
                                  CHÂTEAU LA CONSEILLANTE
                                                    POMEROL
                                Approximately 80% merlot, 20% cabernet franc
I have always loved Conseillante’s grace, yet underlying power. The wine is supple and cocoa-y on the one hand
(so very like Pomerol), yet full of fascinating dark bitters and waves of exotic spices on the other. Best of all, it
moves like a pendulum across the full range of the palate. The finish fades and flickers out slowly, like some old
French film. The estate, located near the border with St.-Émilion, has the famed Château Cheval Blanc for a
neighbor. For the last 140 years, La Conseillante (and now its modern, new, ovoid-shaped winery) has been owned
and cared for by the Nicolas family.
                                              CHÂTEAU ANGÉLUS

                             ST.-ÉMILION | PREMIER GRAND CRU CLASSÉ “A”
                                Approximately 55% merlot, 45% cabernet franc
Angélus is as majestic and thunderingly impressive as a French cathedral. But when it’s young, it’s wound tight
with espresso bean, dark plum, earth, and exotic spice aromas and flavors. With time (and this is a wine that can
teach one about time), there’s a slow reveal, and you can almost feel the surrender in the wine—a kind of descent
(or ascent) into loveliness. In 2012, Château Angélus was promoted to “A” status among St.-Émilion’s Grand Cru
Classés. The estate has been owned by the de Boüard de Laforest family for more than a century. The name refers
to the three bells still rung for the custom of Angélus (the eleventh-century monastic practice of reciting three Hail
Marys during the evening bell), which are audible from the château’s vineyards. The bells are located in the nearby
chapel at Mazerat, the church in Saint-Martin de Mazeret, and the church in St.-Émilion.
                     CHÂTEAU PICHON LONGUEVILLE, COMTESSE DE LALANDE

                                         PAUILLAC | SECOND GROWTH
  45% to 70% cabernet sauvignon (depending on the vintage) followed by merlot, with tiny amounts of
                                  cabernet franc and petit verdot
Pichon Lalande, as it is simply called, is located beside Château Latour and across the road from its deeply
powerful and intense cousin Château Pichon Longueville Baron (usually just called Pichon Baron). Pichon Lalande
is the more feminine and elegant of the two, indeed the wine almost lifts off the palate, with cassis and cocoa
flavors infused with spices, minerals, and a sense of beautiful fresh pine trees. Yet, for all of its flavor, the wine is
never weighty or ponderous. It knows how to creep up on you. Pichon Longueville Comtesse de Lalande is owned
by the Champagne house Louis Roederer.




                                         CHÂTEAU BRANAIRE-DUCRU

                                         ST.-JULIEN | FOURTH GROWTH
                     Mostly cabernet sauvignon, with merlot, cabernet franc, petit verdot
Branaire-Ducru has steadily climbed the charts in reputation and price over the past several years. Although a
Fourth Growth in 1855, the wine sells on par with many Second Growths today. And it’s a stunner. Exquisite
richness. Structurally immaculate. Intense. Focused. Enduring. And possessing a rarified kind of beauty. It’s a wine
that Colette or Hemingway would have admired.
                                      CHÂTEAU LÉOVILLE-POYFERRÉ

                                        ST.-JULIEN | SECOND GROWTH
                     Mostly cabernet sauvignon, with merlot, petit verdot, cabernet franc
Imagine eating milk chocolate candy bars your whole life and then someone gives you a piece of intense, 80
percent cacao dark chocolate. A whole new sensory universe opens in the chocolate center of your brain. That’s
how I’ve felt about the last several vintages of Léoville-Poyferré. The structure and intensity are formidable. The
flavor is molecularly dense. The texture is molten softness. And yet the wine is not bombastic or out of balance.
Indeed, it is thrilling to see the flavors of Bordeaux taken to the nth power. At the time of the French Revolution,
there was one grand Léoville (Lion) estate. It was subsequently broken up into two estates, Château Léoville-Las
Cases and Château Léoville-Barton. Eventually Léoville Las Cases was again divided and Château Léoville-
Poyferré was created on the unnamed piece of land.




                                        CHÂTEAU COS D’ESTOURNEL

                                      ST.-ESTÈPHE | SECOND GROWTH
                              Approximately 65% merlot, plus cabernet sauvignon
The boundary line between the tiny communes of Pauillac and St.-Estèphe finds Château Lafite in the former, Cos
d’Estournel in the latter. Yet Cos, as it is known (the s is pronounced), is indisputably one of the most distinctive
Bordeaux. In great years it has an exotic, earthy, you-just-opened-a-humidor sensuality to its aroma (not unlike
Château Haut-Brion), but the classic, soaring structure, deep concentration, and supple elegance of Lafite-
Rothschild. In great years (1985, 1995, 2000) and with some age, the wine’s savory richness and almost creamy
tannin leave most tasters awestruck. The château was one of the first in Bordeaux to develop an Asian market—in
the 1820s!
In Champagne, a traditional basket press is often still used for grapes.
CHAMPAGNE

For many wine drinkers, Champagne is not simply a wine; it is also a state of mind.
Handed a glass, we simply abandon ourselves to its dizzying pleasure. How a mere
beverage achieved such distinction is a complex story, made all the more rewarding
because of its unlikeliness.
   The story begins 70 million years ago, in the Mesozoic era, when a vast prehistoric sea
covered northern France and Britain. As the waters receded and the so-called Paris Basin
sank, a great crescent of limestone, rich with minerals and marine fossils, was left behind.
From this geologic legacy would eventually emerge the beautiful, chilly vineyards of
Champagne. Sunlight here is painfully scarce, and vines exist at their limits of cold
tolerance—the average temperature, amazingly, is no more than 50°F (10°C).

      “Remember gentlemen, it’s not just France we are fighting for, it’s
      Champagne!”
                                                 — SIR WINSTON CHURCHILL

   The wine Champagne comes from the region of Champagne, 90 miles northeast of
Paris. Here, the vineyard land—considered among the most expensive in the world—is
owned, primarily, by fifteen thousand small growers. A majority of the grapes they raise
will be made into Champagne by nearly 350 wine firms, known as houses (Moët &
Chandon, Veuve Clicquot, and Taittinger are famous examples). In addition, more than
4,500 of the 15,000 growers make their own limited-production, often stellar,
Champagnes. And there are also 136 cooperatives, several of which, like Collet and
Nicolas Feuillate, boast Champagnes of very good quality.
   Well-known wines have been made in the Champagne region since Roman times.
Those wines (both red and white) were, for much of their history, only slightly
effervescent, not bubbly. By the Middle Ages, the wines had found a receptive audience
among affluent locals, for Champagne was a wealthy region known for its superb and
expensive textiles. Indeed, many Champagne houses were eventually begun by the well-
to-do German accountants of textile firms—men with names like Krug, Heidsieck,
Mumm, and Deutz.

      The name Champagne was first used in the sixth century and is derived from
      campagnia remensis, a Latin term for the countryside around the city of
      Reims.

  As the seventeenth century drew to a close, the blended sparkling wine we recognize as
Champagne began to emerge. It was not suddenly invented, as the story goes, by a monk
named Dom Pérignon (although he was important in its development). Rather,
Champagne was the curious result of decades of work by many Champenois, based on a
happenstance of nature.
    Climate is key to the explanation. Champagne is one of the coolest wine-producing
areas in the world. Historically, wines would be made in the fall and left to settle over the
winter. The cold temperatures would generally paralyze the yeasts, temporarily halting the
fermentation before all of the grape sugar had been turned into alcohol. Once spring
arrived and the wines (and yeasts) warmed up, the wines would gently bubble or sparkle—
a sign that fermentation had resumed. For centuries, the Champenois were not amused. At
a time before Louis Pasteur’s discovery (in 1860) of yeasts and the actions of
fermentation, wines that foamed were frightening. Worse, it seemed that only the wines of
Champagne behaved so strangely. Wines made in Burgundy—Champagne’s archrival to
the south—never bubbled.

                        THE QUICK SIP ON CHAMPAGNE
         CHAMPAGNE IS AROMATICALLY, texturally, and in terms of flavor, one of the most
         distinct wines in the world. It comes from only one region, also called Champagne,
         where the cold temperatures and limestone soils help to create a definitive terroir.
         ALL CHAMPAGNES ARE BLENDS of as many as a hundred separate still wines and,
         among winemakers in the region, the art of blending is considered paramount.
         THE COMPLEX AND PAINSTAKING process by which Champagnes are made
         involves a secondary fermentation during which natural carbon dioxide gas is trapped
         inside each bottle. The trapped CO2 will eventually become Champagne’s bubbles.


   Frustrated by Champagne’s foam, many clerical winemakers of the seventeenth
century, including Dom Pérignon, strove painstakingly to develop techniques that would
quell the fizziness. By today’s standards, their Champagnes would have been
unrecognizable. They were cloudy, gritty, pinkish wines, often oxidized and heavily
sweetened (probably with a molasses-like product) to disguise their tartness.
  One possible improvement, experimented with by some Champenois, was to keep the
wine in glass bottles, where it might remain fresher, longer. Most Champagnes at the time
were, by law, sold in barrels, since the liquid, contained in that manner, was easily
measured and therefore easily taxed. Barrels would then be shipped by boat down
Champagne’s Marne River to the Seine River, and on to Paris, and often to Great Britain.
                                       DOM PÉRIGNON
 Although no one person invented Champagne, Pierre Pérignon (Dom is an honorific title for a monk) was
 among a group of innovative clerics whose techniques furthered Champagne’s evolution.
    Pérignon was sent, at the age of twenty-nine, to the Abbey of Hautvillers (now owned by Moët &
 Chandon). Soon thereafter, he became its procureur, the administrator in charge of all the goods that
 provided a living for the monks, including wine.
    Pérignon (who may not have drunk wine himself) was an avid winemaker and savvy businessman. He
 increased both the size of the abbey’s vineyard holdings and the value of the wine produced. By 1700,
 the wines of Hautvillers were worth four times that of basic Champagne.
    Pérignon and his monk/winemaker colleagues were the first to master the art of making a clear white
 wine from red grapes. Although this is easily done today, all white wine made at the turn of the
 seventeenth century either came from white grapes, or the “white” wine was actually gray from skin
 contact with red grapes. Pérignon was fanatical about consistency, precision, and discipline in grape-
 growing and winemaking. He insisted that vines be pruned severely and only sparingly fertilized, thus
 lowering the yield of each grapevine and improving the concentration of the wine. He mandated that
 grapes be picked early in the morning so that their delicate aromas and flavors would not be
 compromised by the afternoon sun. And he had pressoirs (winepresses) built in the vineyards, so that
 the grapes could be pressed as quickly as possible.
    Pérignon was also the first to keep the wines from different vineyard lots separate and the first to
 realize that blending several still wines ultimately leads to a more interesting Champagne. Most
 important, he was the first to experiment with glass flasks as a way to preserve Champagne’s freshness,
 instead of leaving it in wooden barrels, where it easily oxidized.
     All of these innovations made Champagne a vastly better wine. What we don’t know for sure is how
 Dom Pérignon felt about Champagne’s sparkle. He was, of course, never able to prevent it, despite his
 initial attempts. Champagne historians believe that Pérignon, renowned for his business acumen,
 eventually came to see that sparkle as the key to Champagne’s future commercial success.


      “The sparkling froth of this fresh wine is the dazzling image of us, the
      French.”
                                                                                 — VOLTAIRE

   In Britain, where the Industrial Revolution was about to begin, sturdy glass was widely
available. Indeed, British wine merchants were already beginning to transfer the barrels of
Champagne they imported into British bottles. Soon, to satisfy the national sweet tooth,
many British merchants began adding sugar to the bottles before sealing them. That bit of
added sugar, eagerly consumed by yeasts in the air and exisiting naturally inside the
bottles, restarted fermentation, throwing off even more CO2—this time, trapped inside
each bottle. The coincidental result—a bigger pop when the bottle was eventually opened
—was, as far as the Brits were concerned—amusing, not to mention wonderfully
distinctive.
                                   THE LOOK OF LUXURY
 For centuries, artistically arresting bottles have been part of many houses’ strategies to inspire desire for
 the “art” within. But no bottle is more stunning or renowned than Perrier-Jouët’s art-nouveau-style “flower
 bottle,” with its enameled arabesque of white anemones. Meant to celebrate the period known as the
 Belle Époque (1840s to 1914) the bottle was designed by renowned art-nouveau glassmaker Émile
 Gallé. Soon after its creation in 1902, the flower bottle was abandoned due to the difficulty in
 manufacturing it. To fire the design, Gallé had to heat the enamel to 1,112°F (600°C), just below the
 melting point of glass. In the early 1960s, Pierre Ernst, then president of Perrier-Jouët, found one of the
 original Gallé bottles and resolved to recreate it for Maxim’s, the legendary Parisian nightclub. Ernst
 found an artisan enamel specialist who created a technique for manufacturing the bottles en masse. The
 modern flower bottle premiered in 1969 and held the 1964 vintage of the house’s prestige wine, logically
 named cuvée Belle Epoque. The very first of those bottles was opened in Paris at a seventieth birthday
 party for jazz musician Duke Ellington. In 2012, a hundred years after its creation, the famous flower
 bottle was exquisitely updated by Japanese floral designer Makoto Azuma, who added golden vines and
 delicate dotted flowers to the classic pattern of anemones. A mere one hundred bottles (containing the
 2004 vintage) were produced.




   The Champenois started to think the same way. In 1728, French King Louis XV
standardized bottle sizes and allowed Champagne’s wines to be shipped in glass bottles for
the first time. The product met with extraordinary success abroad. Although bottled
Champagne cost twice as much as barreled Champagne (at the time, as many as 20
percent of glass bottles exploded from the pressure of the bubbles inside, and moving
hundreds of thousands of bottles from place to place was long, tedious work), the drama of
Champagne’s quivering bubbles and effusive pop had become unquestionably chic. Soon,
the forests ringing Champagne were replete with giant, wood-fired kilns where beautiful
French glass bottles were made.
   There were still problems, however. Although glass had improved and wineglasses
themselves were now clear, Champagne remained a cloudy liquid because of the spent
yeast cells in it. Increasingly, drinkers wanted to be able to see those curious bubbles. By
the early 1800s, Champagnes were sometimes being decanted from bottle to bottle to
remove the cloudy sediment of spent yeast cells. Of course, the more a Champagne was
decanted, the more likely it was to go flat.
   The solution was a process called rémuage (from the verb remuer, to move something
several times), known in English as riddling, which allows the yeasts to be removed from
the wine in one frozen clump. The process was developed in 1816 by Antoine de Müller,
the chef du cave (head of the wine cellar) of Nicole Ponsardin Clicquot, owner of the
Champagne house eventually known as Veuve Clicquot.
    Slowly, more improvements ensued. The flavor of Champagne was getting better,
thanks to better work in the vineyards, and, as a result, there was less need to camouflage
it with sweetness. Champagnes began to get drier. More and more, houses hoping to
capture new markets and increase sales positioned Champagne as an aperitif perfect to
begin an evening, rather than a sweet wine suited to the end of one. First came half-dry
Champagnes—demi-sec. When these proved successful, producers began making sec, or
dry, Champagnes (these were actually fairly sweet by today’s standards). By the 1840s,
the British in particular began to covet decidedly dry Champagnes. Very dry Champagnes
intended just for them were made and sold with the designation extra-dry, a term in
English rather than French. Finally, as time passed, an even drier version—called brut—
was made (which is how extra-dry turns out to be, in effect, slightly sweeter than brut).




Moët & Chandon, founded in 1743 by Claude Moët. One of the preeminent Champagne houses today, the company owns
 2,840 acres (1,150 hectares) of vineyards and produces approximately 26,000,000 bottles of Champagne each year.

   In 1846, in a radical move at the time, Perrier-Jouët made a Champagne without any
sugar at all. But Champagne drinkers found it too severe—too brutelike, indeed. It took
another generation before brut wine gained widespread acclaim. In 1874, the Pommery
wine called Nature was the first to establish Champagne as a dry wine. It’s interesting to
note that the evolution of Champagne as a drier and drier wine continues to this day. Two
decades ago, most brut Champagnes had a dosage of 12 to 15 grams of residual sugar.
Today, the dosage of most top houses’ brut Champagnes is 9 or 10 grams. (Read about
how dosage works in Making Champagne, page 181.)
   Champagne’s improvements in the nineteenth century were met with such success (and
sales) that the houses launched elite promotional campaigns aimed at aristocrats, royalty,
and the world’s most wealthy individuals. By the beginning of the twentieth century,
Champagne’s luxury status was nothing short of legendary.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Three billion bottles of sparkling wine are made every year in the world. But no matter
where they are from, these sparklers are always distinguished from Champagne (see
California Sparklers and French Champagne: Comparisons, page 691).
   Mapped out by the Institut National des Appellations d’Origine (INAO) in 1927, the
Champagne region includes some 85,000 acres (34,000 hectares), which is about half the
size it was prior to phylloxera (see page 30). Of this total area, 97 percent (82,800 acres;
33,500 hectares) is already planted. Thus, all the vines of Champagne would easily fit
into, say, the city limits of Denver, Colorado.




  The harvest at Taittinger, one of Champagne’s great traditional houses. In the cold northern climate of the region,
                                             harvesting is chilly work.
                           THE GRAPES OF CHAMPAGNE
                                               WHITE
 CHARDONNAY: Major grape and the only white grape grown in the region. Used in virtually all
 Champagnes generally for its finesse. Champagnes called blanc de blancs are based exclusively on
 chardonnay.

                                                REDS
 PINOT MEUNIER: Major grape, although the least ageworthy of Champagne’s three grapes. It usually
 contributes fruitiness and body. Technically not a separate variety, but rather a clone of pinot noir.
 PINOT NOIR: The more revered of Champagne’s two red grapes. It often contributes body, texture, and
 aroma.

   Unlike Burgundy, which has more than one hundred controlled and specified
appellations (AOCs) within it, and Bordeaux, which has more than fifty AOCs, all of
Champagne falls into just one appellation—Champagne. (The appellation is governed by
some of the strictest self-imposed regulations of any area in the world.) The region
comprises 320 villages, boasting some 275,000 separate vineyard plots. These villages are
ranked as either Grand Cru (17 villages), Premier Cru (42 villages), or Cru (258 villages).
Every vineyard in a village holds the same rank. Collectively, the villages produce about
320 million bottles of Champagne a year.
    The region has two phenomenal natural assets that are key to the style of wine made
here: its iffy, northerly climate and its limestone-laced soils. Climatically, Champagne
lives life on the edge. As noted, the average temperature is just 50°F (10°C), a bare
minimum for photosynthesis. It can be wet and rainy at the worst possible time—in late
summer, when rot can erupt and the grapes themselves can become waterlogged or
attacked by the mold Botrytis cinerea. It’s also very cold in the winter, and annihilating
spring frosts and summer hailstorms are not unusual. In short, the grapes usually have a
difficult time surviving and then ripening evenly. In fact, the small vines are intentionally
trained low to the ground so they can absorb whatever warmth might be reflected off the
white soil.
   The famous white soil of Champagne is more than 75 percent limestone, and in many
parts, a specific type of porous limestone known as chalk. Like a great white crescent, the
area that spans from Britain’s White Cliffs of Dover to Champagne was once the basin of
a vast prehistoric sea. Some 70 million years ago, the waters receded, leaving behind
minerals, such as quartz and zircon, plus fossils of sea urchins, sea sponges, and other sea
animals. These fossils helped form the chalk. Millions of years later, violent earthquakes
erupted, mixing the chalk with material from within the earth and creating the sloping hills
over which the best Champagne vineyards now lie.
   Walking in the countryside, it is not unusual to see stark white outcroppings, bare slices
of ashen-colored earth pierced by the ends of deeply burrowed grapevine roots. The soft
and porous chalk encourages the roots to delve deeply into the earth in search of water.
Chalk drains well but also acts as a reservoir that can provide water back to the vines,
even in very dry summers.
   Champagne may only be made from three varieties of grapes: chardonnay, pinot noir,
and pinot meunier (the “fourth grape” of Champagne is often said to be time itself, in
recognition of how long the wine is aged). Of the three, pinot meunier is technically not a
separate variety but rather a clone of pinot noir. Each of these grapes has its own assets—
and its own needs in terms of soils and sunlight. Thus, each tends to be planted in certain
areas within Champagne, but not in others.

      For me, a great Champagne possesses the contrapuntal tension of opposites—
      like a sword enveloped in whipped cream. The sword is the Champagne’s
      dramatic acidity. The whipped cream is the hedonic texture that comes from
      sur lie aging.

   In general, chardonnay tends to be planted in the chalkiest sites, and when well made,
contributes an almost unreal sense of purity, laciness, linearity, and finesse to the blend.
Chardonnay grown on chalk also contributes a flavor often described as chalky or
minerally. Indeed, the Champenois believe firmly that minerality in wine is a flavor
derived specifically from chalk.
                         IS IT CHALK OR IS IT LIMESTONE?
 In wine conversations, the words chalk and limestone are often used interchangeably to refer to
 especially prized soils. But the two are not exactly the same. Chalk is limestone, but limestone is not
 necessarily chalk.
     Limestone, a soil type found in Champagne, Burgundy, parts of the Loire Valley, central Spain, and
 several other wine regions, is a marine sedimentary rock made from decomposed seashells and marine
 skeletons that are extremely high in calcium. Limestone can form under a variety of conditions; thus,
 there are many different types, including chalk, marble, marl, coquina (a sedimentary rock composed of
 fragments of mollusk and invertebrate shells), and oolitic limestone (a carbonate rock made up of ooliths
 or ooids, which are sand-size carbonate particles that have concentric rings of calcium carbonate). Not
 all types of limestone are conducive to grape-growing—but chalk, in particular, is. Defined as soft
 limestone that is porous and cool, chalk allows for easy root penetration. It provides good drainage, and
 works well with high-acid grapes. It is, as a result, especially appreciated in Champagne and Burgundy,
 where the grapes are indeed high in acid and the significant rainfall means good drainage is a must.

   Pinot noir has more gravitas, more structure. In famous Grand Cru villages such as Aÿ,
on the Montagne de Reims, pinot noir can be rich and complex. (As an aside, no
Champagne village is more cherished or lauded than Aÿ. Indeed, the name of the
Champagne town Epernay evolved from après Aÿ, or “after Aÿ.”)
   And pinot meunier is a savior. Less prone to frost and botrytis than the other two, it can
be planted in the Marne Valley nearer the low-lying river, and thus in more humid
conditions. Pinot meunier has a supple, fresh fruitiness to it and is often used in
nonvintage blends for that reason. It’s considered the variety least capable of long aging,
and thus tends not to be used in vintage and prestige cuvée Champagnes.
                              THE INCREDIBLE CRAYÈRES
 In order to have enough stone to construct the city of Reims in what was then Gaul, in the fourth century,
 the Romans dug three hundred immensely deep quarries in the chalky rock. These same vertical chalk
 pits, called crayères, are used today by the Champagne houses to age Champagne. They are miracles
 of construction that seem to defy physics, and descending into their eerily quiet, cold, dark, humid
 chambers is an otherworldly experience that no wine drinker should miss. Because the best chalk was
 often well underground, the crayères often go down as far as 120 feet (36 meters). They are shaped like
 pyramids, so the deepest parts of the crayères are also the widest and the tops of the pits are narrow
 (this limited air exposure in the quarry and kept the chalk moist and soft, and thus easier to cut into large
 construction blocks). During World War I, when Reims was extensively bombed, twenty thousand people
 lived for years in the dark crayères (no sunlight penetrates). Indeed, the crayères under Veuve Clicquot
 and Ruinart were makeshift hospitals, and under Pommery, a school.




                            The Grand Cru vineyard of Aÿ, in the Vallée de la Marne.

   Finally, while, as I’ve said, there is only one AOC in Champagne—that is, Champagne
—the region encompasses five main vineyard areas (below). These are usually not listed
on the label, but in investigating any wine, you’ll find references to them.
1 MONTAGNE DE REIMS,     the “mountain of Reims”; an essentially south-facing slope where
the chalk layer is deep. Mostly planted with pinots noir and meunier.
2 CÔTE DES BLANCS,  the “hillside of whites”; named for the chalky outcroppings near the
surface of the ground here. Planted almost exclusively with chardonnay. Mostly east
facing.
3 VALLÉE DE LA MARNE,  “valley of the Marne River”; mostly planted with pinot meunier.
Soils tend more toward marl, clay, and sand.
4 CÔTE DE SÉZANNE, just south of the Côte des Blancs, and like it, mostly east facing and
planted with chardonnay.
5 CÔTE DES BAR    (also known as the Aube), a region relatively far to the south of the other
regions; mostly planted with pinot noir. Many young growers are making exciting small-
production wines there.
   Of these areas, Montagne de Reims, Côte des Blancs, and Vallée de la Marne are the
three most important. The first two between them share all seventeen Grand Cru villages.

          THE CATHEDRAL OF KINGS–THE WINE OF KINGS
        Champagne’s characterization as the wine of kings is based on its association with the
        Cathedral of Reims, the coronation site of virtually every French king. Built in the
        thirteenth century, the cathedral (which is dedicated to the Virgin Mary) marks the site
        of the baptism of Clovis I, King of the Franks, in 496. (The year of Clovis’s baptism is
        also considered the birth of modern France.)
           Construction of the cathedral began in 1211 on the site of two former Romanesque
        cathedrals. By the time it was completed almost 100 years later, the cathedral, with its
        dramatic, 114-foot-high (35-meter) great rose stained-glass window, and its 2,300
        (originally, brightly painted) statues, was considered among the most stunning Gothic
        cathedrals of all time.
           Ranking with those at Chartres, the cathedral’s immense stained glass windows
        have remained under the care of one family of glassmakers—the Simon family—since
        the seventeenth century. During the bombings of World War II, the main stained glass
        windows were, piece by piece, painstakingly removed and hidden, and thereby saved
        from the destruction suffered by the rest of the city. In 1954, Jacques Simon was
        commissioned by the Champagne producers to create three additional triptych windows
        portraying the art of vine growing and winemaking in Champagne.
           The facade’s portals contain some of the most impressive statuary to be seen in any
        Gothic cathedral, including figures representing David and Goliath, the coronation of the
        Virgin, the kings of France, and the famous Smiling Angel, l’ange au sourire. The local
        Champenois expression for joy—the smile of Reims—is based on the statue’s beaming
        countenance.
                          MAKING CHAMPAGNE

Champagne, along with Sherry, Port, and Madeira, is one of the world’s most complicated
wines to make. Not only are the steps involved numerous and demanding, but the
winemaking itself requires a specific type of intellectual dexterity that can be daunting.
  The Champagne maker makes not one or even ten wines, but hundreds of still wines.
These are sometimes referred to as the base wines, and they look like typical white wines.
They are all made from one of Champagne’s three grapes: chardonnay, pinot noir, or pinot
meunier. All will eventually be blended. And that is where the plot thickens.
   The Champagne maker’s goal is not to make a blend of wines that immediately tastes
good. This, in any case, would be difficult, for the base wines used to make Champagne
are virtually vibrating with acidity and often taste rather simple at first. Instead, the
Champagne maker blends these base wines with an idea, an imagining of what the blended
wine will taste like years later, once it has undergone a long period sur lie, plus a second
fermentation, has possibly been sweetened by some dosage, and has developed bubbles.
Years of skill, experimentation, and experience are needed to understand what a given
blend might taste like post-transformation. (The sensory demands are so complex that few
houses employ just one winemaker. Most have a team of individuals, often headed by a
senior winemaker, the so-called “memory of the house,” who remembers distant vintages,
how the wines were made, and how they turned out decades after aging.)
                         HOW DRY IS THAT CHAMPAGNE?
 After the yeasts are removed from each bottle, Champagnes may be topped up with sweetened reserve
 wine, or liqueur d’expédition. The number of grams of sugar in this liqueur—known as the dosage—will
 determine the category of Champagne made.
    The vast majority of Champagnes now produced are brut (less than 1.2 percent sugar), and some
 Champagnes (known as dosage zero) have no added sugar whatsoever. As for the categories sec,
 demi-sec, and doux—while they are treasured in some countries, these Champagnes are increasingly
 rare, and constitute only a tiny percentage of the Champagnes now made.
    Below are the categories of Champagne based on their dosage. Keep in mind that, relative to, say, a
 luscious dessert wine, no Champagne today is extremely sweet. Sauternes, for example, often contains
 120 grams of sugar per liter, making it 12 percent sugar.
 BRUT NATURE: less than 3 grams of sugar per liter (.3 percent sugar)
 EXTRA BRUT: 0 to 6 grams per liter (0 to .6 percent sugar)
 BRUT: less than 12 grams per liter (less than 1.2 percent sugar)
 EXTRA-DRY: 12 to 17 grams per liter (1.2 to 1.7 percent sugar)
 SEC: 17 to 32 grams per liter (1.7 to 3.2 percent sugar)
 DEMI-SEC: 32 to 50 grams per liter (3.2 to 5 percent sugar)
 SWEET: more than 50 grams per liter (5 percent sugar)

   The process begins with the harvest. To ensure elegance in the final wine, the grapes
must be harvested gently and quickly by hand so that the juice doesn’t pick up any tannic
coarseness from the skins. The grapes are often therefore not transported to a winery to be
pressed, but rather pressed right in the vineyard in some two thousand pressing houses.
Each lot of grapes is kept separate.
   In most cases, the juice is fermented in stainless steel vats, which allows the wine-
maker to control the temperature and pace of the fermentation and completely inhibits
oxidation. However, a few houses (notably Krug, Bollinger, Louis Roederer, and
Jacquesson) still ferment some of their wines in used wooden barrels, as was historically
done. Champagnes that have been fermented in barrels often take on a slight nuttiness and
a fuller mouthfeel as a result of slight oxygen exposure. And since the barrels are never
even close to new, there is never any oak flavor. After fermenting their wines, most
producers (but not all) will put those wines through malolactic fermentation to soften the
impression of the wines’ acidity.
   The actual number of separate lots of base wine can be astounding. A typical house, for
example, will have hundreds of separate lots of base wines available for use. The largest
house, Moët & Chandon has some eight hundred separate base wines available for use
each year.
In a region of architectural majesty, the Cathedral of Reims is perhaps the most majestic building of all. Construction of
 the cathedral began in 1211. When it was finished 100 years later, the cathedral became the coronation site of French
                                                          kings.


                                       THE SOUND OF TASTE
     I think I like Champagne because of its taste and the way it feels. But Oxford University professor
     Charles Spence has shown that sound also plays a major role in what any of us think about flavor. Some
     of Spence’s research, for example, showed that potato chips taste better if they sound noisier when you
     bite into them. (And who can deny the charming hiss of Champagne being poured into the glass?)
     Moreover, even the sound of a food’s or drink’s packaging can influence our perceptions. (The pop of a
     Champagne cork?—totally appealing.) Interestingly, according to Spence, the perceived flavor of a
     substance can also be affected by background sounds—bacon tastes more bacony if you can hear the
     sound of it sizzling in a pan; eggs are more eggy if you hear chickens.

    In addition, every producer also has a stock of reserve wines held back from former
years, principally the past three years. (As a matter of law, a small amount of reserve wine
is held back each year to ensure consistency of flavor year to year and as a hedge against
tiny crop yields in difficult vintages.) Even a small amount of this reserve wine can give a
Champagne blend extra depth and complexity, although it might mitigate against a sense
of freshness.
   In the spring after the harvest, the wine-makers for a given house will start the process
of making that house’s nonvintage wine by blending dozens of base wines from different
years. The blend finally arrived at (still a still wine) is called the assemblage. The flavor of
every Champagne hinges on its blend. Thus, in the region, blending is considered not only
a phenomenal skill, but also a high art.
   If the weather has been particularly good, certain lots of wine will be set aside as
blending material for the house’s vintage Champagne (a type of Champagne in which the
blend is composed only from the wines of a single year) and other lots for a prestige cuvée
(the house’s top, most expensive wine). However, no house will use up all of its great lots
making a vintage or a prestige cuvée wine at the expense of turning out a mediocre
nonvintage. Since the lion’s share of what every house makes every year is nonvintage,
making an inferior one would make no business sense.
       COMPARING NONVINTAGE, VINTAGE, AND PRESTIGE
                        CUVÉES
 Nonvintage Champagnes differ from vintage and prestige cuvée Champagnes in a number of ways,
 detailed below.

                                           VINEYARDS
 In Champagne, some forty-two villages (and all of the vineyards in them) are considered superior and are
 ranked Premier Cru. Seventeen more villages (and the vineyards within those) carry an even higher
 status: Grand Cru.
 NONVINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Grapes come from good vineyards (neither Premier Cru nor Grand Cru)
 although some Premier Cru wine may be blended in.
 VINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Grapes come from good to great vineyards, many of which are ranked
 Premier Cru or Grand Cru.
 PRESTIGE CUVÉE: Grapes come from the greatest vineyards, historically, ranked Grand Cru
 exclusively.

                                             GRAPES
 Most Champagnes are a blend of chardonnay, pinot noir, and pinot meunier. However, because pinot
 meunier is usually not as capable of long aging as chardonnay and pinot noir, some houses prefer to use
 it only in nonvintage Champagnes, which tend to be drunk early, not cellared for many years.
 NONVINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Pinot meunier is almost always included in the blend.
 VINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Pinot meunier is sometimes included in the blend.
 PRESTIGE CUVÉE: For most—but not all—houses, pinot meunier is rarely included in the blend.

                                           BLENDING
 All Champagnes are blends. Blending, in fact, is considered the most critical skill a Champagne maker
 must possess.
 NONVINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Dozens—sometimes hundreds—of still wines are used, from several
 different years.
 VINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Dozens of still wines are used, from a single year that was considered
 exceptional.
 PRESTIGE CUVÉE: A blend of only the best wines from the best vineyards to which the producer has
 access.

                                 AGING ON THE YEASTS
 Most houses far exceed the legal minimums below.
 NONVINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: fifteen months sur lie.
 VINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: three years sur lie.
 PRESTIGE CUVÉE: No requirement; common practice is four to ten years sur lie.

   Next, the nonvintage blend will be mixed with a small amount of yeasts plus a liqueur
de tirage—a combination of sugar and wine—and then bottled and capped. The
predictable happens. The yeasts eat the sugar (this constitutes a second fermentation),
forming a bit more alcohol and throwing off carbon dioxide gas. Or trying to. Because the
bottles are capped, the CO2 cannot escape. It becomes physically trapped in the wine as
dissolved gas. When the bottles are eventually opened, this trapped gas will explode and
become bubbles.
    Legally, the bottles must rest in the cellars for at least fifteen months at this point, but
in practice, most producers leave them there for about three years. Because the yeasts are
still inside the bottles, the wine is said to be resting sur lie (on the yeasts). Although it may
seem as if the yeasts’ job is done, they continue to have a profound effect on the wine
inside the bottle. Through a process called autolysis, the yeasts’ cell walls begin to
disintegrate, spilling the contents of each yeast cell (amino acids, lipids, and enzymes) into
the wine. The effect is to give the wine an almost magical sense of creaminess, and greater
complexity. Indeed, it is Champagne’s long aging on the yeasts that gives the wine what I
call contrapuntal tension. In the same split second, Champagne’s sensory impact is
lightning crisp (from acidity) yet lusciously creamy (from sur lie aging).
   If the nonvintage Champagne was sold at this point, it would be cloudy with yeast
cells. To remove the yeasts and create a clear Champagne, the bottles are riddled—turned
upside down, then slightly rotated some twenty-five times. Traditionally, bottles to be
riddled were placed in an A-shaped frame known as a pupitre, and turned by hand by a
person called a rémueur. A good rémueur can riddle thirty thousand to forty thousand
bottles a day, and pupitres are still used, primarily for prestige cuvée Champagnes. Most
nonvintage Champagnes today are riddled equally effectively, but more efficiently, by
large machines called gyropalettes. At work twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, a
gyro-palette can riddle a Champagne in one to two weeks, versus two months or more
when the wine is in pupitre.




                   Magnums of Ruinart Blanc de Blancs lie in the house’s spectacular crayères.


                                               THE PUNT
    While it’s tempting to pour a Champagne by holding the bottle with one’s thumb inserted in the punt, the
    indentation in the bottom of the bottle was never intended for such a purpose. Originally, the punt was a
    way of preventing the jagged pontil mark—the point left over after a glass bottle was blown and shaped—
     from scratching the surface of a table. By pushing the pontil up into the interior of the bottle, a punt was
     formed and the table was saved. When mold-made wine bottles were introduced, the punt remained, since
     it adds stability to the bottle when the bottle is upright. With Champagne bottles, however, the punt has
     even greater purpose. During the second fermentation, which ultimately gives Champagne its bubbles, six
     atmospheres of pressure are built up inside the glass wall of the bottle. The Champagne bottle’s
     prominent punt allows for a more even distribution of pressure inside the bottle, preventing the disastrous
     explosions that were a common and serious problem for early Champagne makers.




  The vin clairs (base wines) at Veuve Clicquot. In the late fall after the harvest, houses taste each of their wines from
               different villages and vineyards in order to begin making the assemblage or master blend.

   As the bottles are riddled, the yeast cells collect in the necks of the bottles. Now
removal is easy. In a process called dégorgement, each bottle is placed, still upside-down,
in a glycol solution, which freezes the entire length of the neck and its contents. When the
bottle is then quickly turned upright and the cap removed, the frozen plug of yeasts shoots
out. This leaves a clear, bone-dry wine.
   But it also leaves about ¼ inch (½ centimeter) of space unoccupied. Immediately, the
Champagne is topped up with the liqueur d’expédition, a combination of reserve wine and
sugar. The number of grams of sugar in the liqueur, also known as the dosage, determines
how dry or sweet the Champagne will be (see How Dry Is That Champagne?, page 182).
   During the time the Champagne stays in contact with the yeast lees, it is aging
reductively—that is, without the presence of oxygen—because the broken down yeast
cells bind any oxygen present. Once the wine is disgorged, however, and the yeasts are
removed, the wine begins to age oxidatively—that is, oxygen is present. These two types
of aging are radically different. You could easily experience the difference by tasting two
bottles of the same vintage Champagne that have been disgorged at different times. Let’s
say bottle A is a 2005 Veuve Clicquot that was disgorged in 2009 (after four years on the
yeasts) and you drank it in 2013. Bottle B is 2005 Veuve Clicquot that was disgorged in
2012 (seven years on the yeasts) and, again, you drank it in 2013. Although the bottles are
the same age, and you opened them at the same time, they’d taste very different. In the
first case, the wine was aged for four years oxidatively, without yeast lees present. In the
second case, the wine aged oxidatively, without the yeasts, for just one year.
   Many (but not all) Champagne connoisseurs would prefer the bottle B scenario—aging
as long as possible with the yeasts and disgorging only at the relative last minute before
the wine goes to market. For that reason, a handful of Champagne firms now mark their
Champagnes with a disgorgement date on the wine label. Doing so is controversial in the
region, however. Several houses, for example, point out that some consumers, confused by
the concept of disgorgement, read the date and think it’s a “drink by” date, which it most
certainly is not.

                                    BIBLICAL BOTTLES
         The smallest Champagne bottles hold about one glass of bubbly; the largest, about one
         hundred glasses. Large Champagne bottles are rarities and are individually handblown.
         For unknown reasons, in the late 1800s, such bottles were given the names of biblical
         kings.


          SIZE                                        EQUIVALENT


          SPLIT                                       187.5 milliliters, about 1½ glasses

          HALF-BOTTLE                                 375 milliliters, about 2½ glasses

          BOTTLE                                      750 milliliters, about 5 glasses

          MAGNUM                                      2 bottles, about 10 glasses

          JEROBOAM                                    4 bottles, about 20 glasses

          METHUSELAH                                  8 bottles, about 40 glasses

          SALMANAZAR                                  12 bottles, about 60 glasses

          BALTHAZAR                                   16 bottles, about 80 glasses

          NEBUCHADNEZZAR                              20 bottles, about 100 glasses

            Jeroboam was a king of the northern kingdom of Israel. Methuselah, not an ancient
         king, was distinguished by his incredible longevity, living 969 years. The Assyrian king
         Salmanazar ruled over the Judean kingdom. Balthazar was the name of one of the
         Three Wise Men, known as the Lord of the Treasury and also considered to be a
         grandson of Nebuchadnezzar. The king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar was a prominent
         and powerful ruler who destroyed Jerusalem.
                                           THE BUBBLES

For starters, how many bubbles does a bottle of Champagne have? The answer, for a
standard 750-milliliter bottle, is approximately 100 million. But that’s only if the bottle is
open; in an unopened bottle, the gas is still dissolved in the wine and thus, in an unopened
bottle, there is only the potential for bubbles. The 100 million figure comes from Gérard
Liger-Belair, PhD, in the department of physics at the University of Reims Champagne-
Ardenne, in France, where he has been conducting bubble research for more than a
decade.
   Through the use of special high-speed cameras, Liger-Belair has also discovered that
bubbles play a part in determining the aromas a drinker smells. Each bubble appears to
contain hundreds of chemical components, some of which can affect taste, aroma, and
feel. When the bubble bursts on the surface of the wine, tiny droplets of Champagne are
projected into the air, allowing the drinker to smell the wine more acutely.




     Research in the cold cellars 120 feet (36 meters) underground. I think I was wearing four layers of clothing.

    In Champagne, bubble size and persistency are signs of quality. Tiny bubbles,
considered the best, are the result of a long aging on the yeasts and the temperature of the
aging cellar (the cooler the smaller). Equally important is how the bubbles behave in the
glass. A high-quality Champagne will have streams of bubbles arising from different spots
in the liquid (as many as fifty bubbles per second), coming together to create a spiraling
cascade. At the top of the glass, these collect to form a snowy layer called the mousse.
Champagne makers insist that the feel of the bubbles should be extremely delicate
(nothing like, for example, the harsh, large bubbles in, say, a cola).
                          TYPES OF CHAMPAGNE

By far, most Champagne produced is golden in color and made from all three Champagne
grapes: chardonnay, pinot noir, and pinot meunier. However, there are two somewhat less
well-known types of Champagne that can be quite special: blanc de blancs and rosé. (A
type of sparkling wine known as blanc de noirs also exists but, as you’ll see, it is virtually
nonexistent in Champagne.)
                                       MY FAIR BUBBLY
 Just 80 miles (129 kilometers) north of Champagne is a cool, fairly sunny region with white, chalky
 limestone soils—soils that are strikingly similar to those found in Champagne. Indeed the region is so
 close to Champagne and seems so ideal for making sparkling wine that you’d think the Champenois
 would want to annex it. There’s just one problem. The region in question is in England.
    The English, of course, have always loved bubbles. The country continues to be, as it has been for
 decades, the leading export market for Champagne. But sometime in the 1990s, the English began to
 think big. Why merely buy bubbly? Why not try to make it… especially since southeast England—near
 Sussex, Kent, and of course the White Cliffs of Dover—bears a remarkable resemblance to the
 Champagne region?
   They’ve done just that. More than a dozen British companies, including Ridgeview Estate, Nyetimber,
 Rathfinny, Camel Valley, Hush Heath, and Chapel Down, all make English sparkling wines, and several
 more ventures are in the works. For their part, numerous Champagne houses have scouted the region in
 anticipation of future deals.
   They’ve had a royal welcome. Camilla Parker Bowles, Duchess of Cornwall (and second wife of
 Charles, Prince of Wales) is the current president of the United Kingdom Vineyards Association.



BLANC DE BLANCS CHAMPAGNE
Literally “white from whites,” blanc de blancs Champagne is made entirely from
chardonnay grapes. This type of Champagne was created in 1921 by Eugène-Aimé Salon,
founder of the Champagne house Salon, whose intention was to create a Champagne with
maximum finesse, lightness, and elegance. Easy to say, but exceedingly difficult to do,
since the winemaker limited to one grape variety has fewer overall wines with which to
work.




   The best blanc de blancs are treasured for their lightnesss and their gymnastic lift on
the palate. They, among all Champagnes, are the sopranos, capable of hitting the high
notes of flavor and displaying an especially filigreed sense of texture. Blanc de blancs
generally come from the chalky slopes of the Côte des Blancs, one of the premier grape-
growing regions in Champagne and the one planted almost exclusively with chardonnay.
Within the Côte des Blancs is the grand cru village of Le Mesnil-sur-Oger, home to two of
the most extraordinary blanc de blancs Champagnes in the world: Krug’s Clos du Mesnil
and Salon’s Le Mesnil. Blanc de blancs Champagnes may be nonvintage or vintage. They
are generally expensive.

BLANC DE NOIRS CHAMPAGNE
Blanc de noirs (“white from reds”), is the opposite of blanc de blancs, an ever-so-slightly
pink-tinged golden Champagne made entirely from red grapes (pinot noir and/or pinot
meunier). Blanc de noirs Champagnes are extremely rare in Champagne itself (although
common in, for example, California). Champagne makers seem to like definitiveness
when it comes to color; if they’re not making a golden Champagne, then they’re making
an unapologetically rosy pink rosé.

ROSÉ CHAMPAGNE
Among wine drinkers who know their Champagne, rosé Champagnes, which are richer
and fuller-bodied than goldens, are considered the crème de la crème. They are usually
significantly more expensive than golden Champagnes, a reflection of the fact that they
are more difficult to produce, and they’re more rare, forming just over 6 percent of all
exports. There are two methods for making them. The first—and historical—method
(called saignée) involves letting some of the base wine sit in contact with pinot noir skins
until it picks up enough color to tint the wine pink. The other method, more modern and
more common, involves adding a small amount of still pinot noir wine into each
Champagne bottle before the second fermentation. Both processes are complex, and
achieving a certain exact coloration is difficult, as a lineup of rosé Champagnes will attest.
   A rosé Champagne needn’t be made mostly from red grapes. The assemblage (blend of
base wines) might be a blend of 80 percent pinot noir and 20 percent chardonnay—or just
the opposite, 80 percent chardonnay and only 20 percent pinot noir. A rosé can be made
either way, but when you drink them the impressions the two wines make will be quite
different.
 SERVING CHAMPAGNE—NOT WITH A BANG BUT A
                WHISPER

Champagne is classically served well chilled, and a cold temperature helps maintain the
bubbles when the Champagne is poured. Because Champagne bottles are made with
thicker glass than regular wine bottles, the time required to chill them is longer. Allow
twenty to forty minutes in a bucket of ice and water.

      “The pop of the cork should sound like a gunshot with a silencer.”
                                                       — CLOVIS TAITTINGER,
                                                           Taittinger Champagne

   Opening Champagne is not difficult, but it is different—and far more exciting—than
opening a bottle of still wine. Each Champagne bottle is under six atmospheres of
pressure, about the same as a truck tire. With so much pressure behind it, a cork can fly an
astounding distance. But that’s only if you open the bottle incorrectly. The correct, safe,
and controlled way to open and serve Champagne is:
1 BREAK AND REMOVE    the foil, not the wire cage, from around the cork.
2 PLACE YOUR THUMB    firmly on top of the cork to keep the cork from flying.
3 WITH YOUR OTHER   hand, unscrew the wire (it takes about six turns) and loosen the cage.
You actually don’t have to take the cage off completely.
4 HOLDING THE CORK      firmly, begin to twist it in one direction as, from the bottom, you
twist the bottle in the other direction. Contrary to popular opinion, a Champagne cork
should not make a loud thwock! You’re supposed to ease the cork out, so that it makes just
a light hissing sound. Unbidden, more than one older Frenchman has advised me that a
Champagne bottle, correctly opened, should make a sound no greater than that of a
contented woman’s sigh. Frenchmen are French men after all.
5 FILL EACH GLASS  with about 2 inches (5 centimeters) of Champagne. Then go back and
top them all up. Do not immediately top up glasses with fresh Champagne every time a sip
or two has been taken. Just as topping up a half-filled cup of coffee ensures that you’ll
never have the satisfaction of a fresh, steaming hot cup, so too, frequent topping up of
Champagne can mean the wine is never nicely chilled.
                               GROWER CHAMPAGNES
 Most wine drinkers are familiar with at least a few Champagnes made by the famous houses. But fewer
 know or have tasted many of the so-called grower Champagnes. From the top producers, grower
 Champagnes are distinctive, exquisite, and often mind-blowingly delicious.
    Grower Champagnes are, as the name implies, made by small growers, often family firms who make
 what might be called artisanal Champagnes. Growers do not buy grapes or wine as the houses do.
 Rather, they make Champagnes exclusively from the grapes they grow themselves. As a result, a
 grower’s Champagne is usually based on a very much smaller number of base wines that are blended
 together before the wine undergoes the second, bubble-inducing fermentation. Because a grower is
 using just his own grapes from a small area, grower Champagnes tend to reflect the place where they
 are made. In a sense, grower Champagnes exhibit what might be thought of as a more Burgundian
 approach, wherein individual terroirs are prized above all. Among my favorite grower Champagnes are
 those made by: Pierre Peters, René Geoffroy, Pierre Gimonnet, Gatinois, Doyard, Michel Loriot, Jean
 Milan, Varnier-Fannière, Chartogne-Taillet, and Jean Lallement.


THE RIGHT GLASS
Ever watch people being handed glasses of Champagne? At least half of them
immediately stand up straighter and adopt a sexier tone of voice. The elegant and long-
lined Champagne glass is about as sophisticated as glassware gets.
   Tall, tulip-shaped glasses evolved from conical glasses made between 1300 and 1500 in
Venice. These, in turn, were inspired by some of the earliest drinking vessels, such as
animal horns. Serendipitously, the art of glassmaking was reaching its apex just as
Champagne making was at its pivotal beginnings. By the late seventeenth century,
Venetian glassmakers were capable of creating fragile goblets that possessed remarkable
clarity. Historians theorize that the transparent beauty of such glass may have been one of
the considerations that ultimately led winemakers to develop techniques for making
crystal-clear, sediment-free Champagne.
   Tall Champagne glasses allow the wine’s bubbles to swell as they rise in long, spiraling
streams to the surface. However, the glass should be slightly wide in the middle so that a
bowl is formed within which aromas can congregate. (Severely narrow flutes are not ideal
Champagne glasses.)
                       Riddling Cristal, the first prestige cuvée, in the cellars of Louis Roederer.

   As for the wide, shallow, saucer-shaped Champagne coupe (often used at weddings),
legend has it that the first was a porcelain version invented by Marie Antoinette, who used
her breast (reportedly the left breast because it was closer to her heart) as the mold.
Notwithstanding so compelling a beginning, the coupe is terrible for Champagne. In it,
bubbles dissipate quickly, the Champagne is easily warmed by the drinker’s hand, and,
frustratingly, the vessel itself hardly holds more than two sips.




 A Champagne cellar worker stacking barrels at Krug, one of the few houses that vinifies some of its base wines in oak
                                                     barrels.
                THE STARS AMONG THE CHAMPAGNES
Prestige cuvées are the most expensive and highest-quality category of Champagne. Nearly every house
and significant grower makes a golden prestige cuvée, and several make a rosé version as well. The first
prestige cuvée was made in 1876 by the house of Roederer for Czar Alexander II of Russia, who wanted
an exclusive Champagne not available to (god forbid) the lower aristocracy. The czar further dictated that
it be shipped in leaded crystal bottles. Roederer’s prestige cuvée was hence named Cristal. Among the
other well-known and exquisite prestige cuvées are Bollinger’s “La Grande Année,” Perrier-Jouët’s
“Belle Epoque Fleur de Champagne,” Pol Roger’s “Cuvée Sir Winston Churchill,” Veuve Clicquot’s “La
Grande Dame,” and Taittinger’s “Comtes de Champagne.” Note that Dom Pérignon and Krug consider
all of their wines prestige cuvées. Dom Pérignon also produces Oenothèque, two rare, breathtakingly
expensive bottlings—one golden, one rosé—that have been aged fifteen to thirty years on the yeast lees.
                               The Champagnes to Know
Champagne is my downfall. While other people might spend money on really nice clothes, the latest technology,
exotic travel, and so on, I spend money on bubbles. Champagne has always seemed to me to be the most affordable
luxury. Below are several of my favorite exquisite Champagnes—from large houses to small growers. Had I more
room to write, this list could have easily been three times as long.

                                                     WHITES




                                               PIERRE PETERS
           CUVÉE DE RÉSERVE | BLANC DE BLANCS | GRAND CRU | NONVINTAGE | BRUT
                                                  100% chardonnay
The grower Champagnes from Pierre Peters are jewels—ravishingly beautiful, exquisite, crystalline. Their
animated minerality plays on your palate like high notes on a piano. Yet the flavors are deeply resonant and
complex. There’s something salty, like the breeze on a pure white beach; something evanescent, like the lure of a
delicate white flower; and something familiar yet exotic, like citrus tied up in ribbons of vanilla. Virtually all of the
Pierre Peters vineyards are in the Côte des Blancs, with many in the heralded village of Le Mesnil-sur-Oger.
                                                   J. LASSALLE

                                    BLANC DE BLANCS | VINTAGE | BRUT
                                                 100% chardonnay
One of the first grower Champagnes to be brought into the United States (by importer Kermit Lynch, in 1976), J.
Lassalle is a small, family-run business in the village of Chigny-les-Roses on the Montagne de Reims. Since 1982,
the company has been run by three generations of the women in the family, giving rise to the firm’s unofficial
adage, une femme, un esprit, un style (one woman, one spirit, one style). The Lassalle Champagnes—all of which
undergo malolactic fermentation and are based entirely on Premier Cru vineyards—have exquisite balance. Their
intensity of flavor fills your head like music floating in a room. The Blanc de Blancs is somewhat unusual in that
the chardonnay is grown on the Montagne de Reims, which is prime pinot territory. Is it just my imagination that
this leads to resonance and depth?




                                                      RUINART

                                  BLANC DE BLANCS | NONVINTAGE | BRUT
                                                 100% chardonnay
Ruinart’s Blanc de Blancs, in its rounded, ancient-shaped bottle, is the house’s signature Champagne and a wine of
such elegance and weightlessness that it seems to float around you and then eventually melt on your palate… a
snowflake of sensation, then gone. Yet the wine’s flavors are intense—juicy pears, whipped cream, spices, star fruit,
minerals. Interestingly, there’s a coolness to these flavors, in the way that mint is cooling, no matter what its actual
temperature. Ruinart, founded in 1729 by Dom Ruinart, a contemporary of Dom Pérignon, was the first Champagne
house. Its crayères, vast amphitheaters 60 to 120 feet (18 to 37 meters) deep, are the region’s most impressive. The
house’s prestige cuvée, Dom Ruinart, is another not-to-be-missed wine—an exotic, primordial-tasting wine that,
with age, can smell like truffles.
                                         PIERRE GIMONNET ET FILS

                       BLANC DE BLANCS | PREMIER CRU | NONVINTAGE | BRUT
                                                 100% chardonnay
The top Pierre Gimonnet Champagnes taste as if chalk itself underwent some wizardly molecular transformation
and emerged as exquisitely delicious froth and foam. In the Gimonnet playbook, the Blanc de Blancs is my favorite
wine—an exotic riot of quince and bergamot, with a fresh, green note like lemongrass and a tingling minerality. At
the same time, the wine is very suave, gentle, and creamy. It feels soft yet refreshing, like cool water on a hot day.
Pierre Gimonnet, a relatively large grower Champagne firm, is family owned, with almost all of its vineyards in the
Côte des Blancs.




                                                   POL ROGER

                           EXTRA CUVÉE DE RÉSERVE | NONVINTAGE | BRUT
                    Approximately 33% each of chardonnay, pinot noir, and pinot meunier
Pol Roger is a Champagne drinker’s Champagne—winey, rich, citrusy, yet a bit custardy, with a sublimeness and
seriousness on the palate. The house’s Champagnes have always been favorites in England (Winston Churchill, a
huge admirer, had cases delivered to 10 Downing Street on a regular basis). For me, the Pol Roger Champagnes
always feel like just fallen snow, light yet clingy. And the balance of creaminess versus acidity is impeccable. In
particular, their nonvintage brut, known as Extra Cuvée de Réserve, is an exquisite wine with tiny beads of bubbles
and the wispy elegance that make the top bruts so compelling.
                                                   TAITTINGER

                                                 VINTAGE | BRUT
                                         50% chardonnay, 50% pinot noir
Taittinger’s vintage bruts have an exquisite sense of choreography—they dance and spark on the palate like beams
of light. The wine begins with a rush of crème brûlée-like richness, then moves on to a fierce crispness, with flashes
of wet stone—as if the wine could rain with chalky minerality. Only the most deliciously complex Champagnes
move like this through different worlds of flavor and texture, all in one sip. The house of Taittinger is located on the
site of the ancient Benedictine Abbey of Saint Nicaise, begun in 1231, and a locus of artistic and intellectual
activity for monks until it was destroyed in the French Revolution.




                                                        KRUG

                       GRANDE CUVÉE | NONVINTAGE PRESTIGE CUVÉE | BRUT
                   Approximately 50% pinot noir, 30% chardonnay, and 20% pinot meunier
Krug, broodingly rich and positively Rubenesque in its fullness, is a Champagne with such a distinct style that no
one who has tasted it has ever forgotten it. Every molecule aches with density and intensity. (I always imagine what
roasted nuts would taste like if each little one could be filled with pastry cream.) But the wine is stunning not only
because of its gravitas, but also because of its exquisite balance. Indeed, the contrapuntal tension of Krug—the
simultaneous weight and lightness, impact and stillness—is what makes it such a connoisseur’s wine.
                                                   BOLLINGER

                        LA GRANDE ANNÉE | VINTAGE PRESTIGE CUVÉE | BRUT
                              Approximately 66% pinot noir and 33% chardonnay
Founded in 1829, Bollinger is one of the best-known of the grand historic Champagne houses—and the wines are
always round, rich, winey, luxurious, and toasty. More like lemon curd than fresh lemons; more like caramelized
apple tart than fresh apples. The richness is the result of extremely long aging periods on the yeast lees, as well as
micro-oxygenation. The latter occurs because Bollinger is one of the last remaining houses to vinify their best
wines in impeccably-cared-for old oak barrels. (Indeed, the house has its own cooper and cooperage—the last ones
to exist in Champagne.) La Grande Année, Bollinger’s prestige cuvée, always has a low dosage (just 7 or 8 grams
of sugar per liter, .7 to .8 percent) and comes entirely from Premier Cru and Grand Cru vineyards.




                                                     ROSÉS
                                                   GATINOIS
                                 ROSÉ | GRAND CRU | NONVINTAGE | BRUT
                                         90% pinot noir, 10% chardonnay
The Gatinois family—père, maman, and fils—are the twelfth generation of growers to make Champagnes from 14
acres (5 hectares) of Grand Cru vineyards in the famous village of Aÿ. (Father Pierre, a lawyer by training, is also
the former deputy mayor of the village.) In their tiny dirt-floor cellar behind the village church, everything is done
by hand—even the disgorging of every single one of the fifty thousand bottles they produce each year. The Gatinois
Champagnes are all finely etched and full of personality, but I love the rosé especially—a winey, spicy, minerally
Champagne redolent of kirsch and crushed strawberries that finishes with beautiful richness on the palate.
                                              LOUIS ROEDERER

                                         ROSÉ | NONVINTAGE | BRUT
                                        65% pinot noir, 35% chardonnay
While many Champagne houses in the nineteenth century counted the Russian nobility among their best customers,
the firm of Louis Roederer was especially successful, for the czar himself was its best customer. In 1876, at the
request of Alexander II, Louis Roederer’s son created Cristal, then a sweet Champagne (it’s now dry) presented in a
custom-designed crystal bottle. Cristal became the first prestige cuvée, and it is still the house’s most famous and
expensive wine (both golden and rosé Cristal are made). While Cristal is certainly a Champagne to have at least
once in one’s life, Louis Roederer’s nonvintage brut rosé—made by the old saignée method and a rare wine in and
of itself—is, for me, the can’t-resist wine. Among rosé Champagnes, it is especially stunning, and has a
sumptuousness that is nothing short of all-enveloping. The complex aromatics of pinot noir surge through the wine
until the end, when a beam of bright crispness shatters all sensations. Great rosés such as this must be made from
ripe grapes (difficult to come by in Champagne), and thus the grapes for this wine are sourced on a steep
limestone/clay slope that benefits from light bouncing off the Marne River.
BURGUNDY

Burgundy is not what most people choose to begin their journey with wine; but Burgundy
is often where many of us find ourselves at the end. For Burgundy—Bourgognes in French
—is the most spiritual of wines. Of all the wines in the world, it is the one that poses the
deepest questions, and reminds us that the answers still lie in mystery.
   What is it about this wine from a small, almost secluded region that makes it so
compelling? Above all, great Burgundies are stunningly complex. Drinking them can be
an exercise in discernment, refinement, and delicious patience as subtle layer of flavor
after subtle layer of flavor reveals itself. Indeed, Burgundy is most certainly the “quiet
music” of wine—not the rap.
   The great Burgundies are also indisputably sensual. For centuries they have been
described in the most erotic of ways, and sipping them has been compared, among other
things, to falling in love. This sensuality extends beyond the wines’ provocatively primal
aromas and flavors. The top Burgundies, white and red, have beguiling textures that melt
over or dance upon the palate in ways that make them unforgettable. Unlike many types of
wine, Burgundy’s physicality is trenchant.

      “What else do we have, in the end, except Nature?”
                                                         — FRANÇOIS MILLET,
                                        winemaker, Domaine Comte Georges de Vogüé

   While a small handful of grape varieties are grown in Burgundy, just two dominate
production: chardonnay and pinot noir. Both grapes achieve their greatest elegance when
planted in a cool climate, and that Burgundy has. Of all the wine regions in the world that
are famous for red wine, Burgundy is the coolest and northernmost. The downside of
Burgundy’s marginal climate is that there are years when the lack of sun and/or the
frequency of rain results in grapes that are not fully ripened and mature, leading to
considerably leaner, less flavorful wines. These less-than-ideal years are not uncommon,
and as a result, there are very apparent differences among vintages of Burgundy. Thus,
even the priciest and most pedigreed Burgundies can occasionally be very disappointing.
As spellbinding as a great Burgundy is, a poor one is almost depressing.

                         THE QUICK SIP ON BURGUNDY
         BURGUNDY, a fairly small wine region in northeastern France, makes some of the
         world’s most sought-after, expensive, and exquisite wines.
         THE SYSTEM OF LAND OWNERSHIP is complex. Burgundy has thousands of tiny
         vineyards, each of which has dozens of owners.
         TWO GRAPE VARIETIES DOMINATE. All top white Burgundies are made from
         chardonnay. All top reds come from pinot noir.
   Later in this chapter, we will explore how (and why) Burgundy is an infinitesimally
detailed study in terroir. But for now, it’s important to know that of France’s
approximately five hundred designated appellations (AOCs, or Appellations d’Origine
Contrôlée), just over one hundred are in Burgundy alone.
   Lastly, this chapter addresses the four main regions that wine drinkers think of when
they think about Burgundy—Chablis, the Côte d’Or, the Côte Chalonnaise, and the
Mâconnais. While legally, from a governmental standpoint, Beaujolais is also considered
part of Burgundy, everything about Beaujolais—from soils and grapes to winemaking and
philosophy—is entirely different. So I’ve given Beaujolais its own chapter, following this
one.

      Burgundy got its name in the sixth century, in the aftermath of the fall of the
      Roman Empire, when the wandering Germanic tribe known as the Burgondes
      established a settlement in the area. They called it Burgundia.
       HISTORY, MONKS, THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
       TERROIR, AND THE FRENCH REVOLUTION

Burgundy’s first documented vineyard was planted in the village of Meursault in the first
century A.D. But the population was minuscule and grape growing did not expand. With
the Romans came a somewhat greater emphasis on wine, but Rome’s ties were never as
strong here in the north as they were in southern France. By the fifth century, as the
Roman Empire collapsed, the region was repeatedly plundered by wandering barbarian
tribes. Eventually, in the year 450, the Germanic Burgondes settled in the area, calling it
Burgundia. In 534, Burgundia was absorbed into another Germanic entity, the Frankish
kingdom established by Clovis, the king of the Franks. Clovis eventually went on to unify
the numerous barbaric Germanic tribes that operated throughout what was then called
Gaul. With Clovis’s coronation, modern France (the name is derived from Franks) was
born, and Clovis’s eventual conversion to Christianity established France as a Christian
nation. With Christianity in place, the course of Burgundy’s history changed, as it went on
to become a nucleus for Catholicism and monastic power.
   But the period most crucial in the region’s history was the thousand-year period from
the eighth century to the French Revolution, when much of the land and most of its wines
were under the powerful command of Benedictine and Cistercian monks.
    The Benedictine Abbey of Cluny, founded in the year 909 near Mâcon, was the most
well-endowed order in Europe and the largest landowner in Burgundy until the French
Revolution. At the height of their dominance, the Benedictines controlled more than
fifteen hundred monasteries. The magnificent Abbey of Cluny remained the largest
cathedral in Europe until it was surpassed by the “new” magnificent St. Peter’s in Rome,
consecrated in 1626 (built on the spot of the original small St. Peter’s basilica, dating from
the fourth century).
    At the end of the eleventh century, a reform movement within the Benedictines resulted
in the formation of a second order, the Cistercians. The Cistercian Abbey of Citeaux,
founded in 1098, was one of Europe’s most magnificent workshops devoted to the
creation of books, with monks serving as copyists, illuminators, and book binders. By the
time of the Revolution, its library boasted more than ten thousand volumes.
   Contemplative by nature, patient in temperament, systematic in approach, committed to
grueling physical labor, well bestowed with land, and most important, literate, the monks
were uniquely prepared for their mission: to delineate and codify Burgundy’s vineyards.
Plot by plot, they cleared and cultivated the most difficult limestone slopes of the Côte
d’Or, studiously comparing vineyards and the wines made from them, recording their
impressions over centuries. Tantamount to a millennium-long research project, the work of
these monks not only revealed Burgundy’s greatest vineyards—but, in fact, for the first
time, established terroir as the critical core of viticulture.
                A gray stone cross towers over the renowned Grand Cru vineyard Romanée-Conti.


                                 BURGUNDY’S DOMAINES
    In Burgundy, the term domaine is not precisely equivalent to that of château in Bordeaux. In Bordeaux,
    a château is a single estate composed of vineyards surrounding a building or house that is sometimes
    quite palatial. In Burgundy, a domaine is a collection of vineyard parcels, often extremely small, owned
    by the same family or entity (Domaine Leroy, Domaine Dujac, Domaine Leflaive, and so on). Usually
    these parcels are scattered throughout many villages and appellations, and the domaine will make a
    separate wine from each. A typical Burgundian domaine produces many wines, all in tiny quantities.
    There are six thousand domaines in Burgundy today. Interestingly, some domaines are now dropping the
    word domaine from their labels, in favor of just the producer’s name.

   Burgundy’s monastic orders shared their power with a series of flamboyant and
wealthy dukes who, in return for religious approbation, bestowed even more land upon the
monks. The dukes served as strong promoters for Burgundy; their connections put
Burgundian wines on the tables of popes, French kings, and the nobility. When the pious
among the nobility began donating land to the monks as well, it seemed as though the
fortunes of the church would know no bounds.

                            THE VILLAGES OF BURGUNDY
         To name every important appellation in Burgundy would take pages because, in
         addition to all the villages, there are no fewer than 629 Premier Cru vineyards and 33
         Grand Cru vineyards (see The 33 Grand Cru Vineyards of Burgundy, page 209). Here’s
         a list of Burgundy’s four main regions (in capital letters) and the most significant villages
         within them listed from north to south, and the type of wine each specializes in.

                                                CHABLIS
         CHABLIS white

                                              CÔTE D’OR
Côte de Nuits

MARSANNAY red
FIXIN red
GEVREY-CHAMBERTIN red
MOREY-ST.-DENIS red
CHAMBOLLE-MUSIGNY red
VOUGEOT red
FLAGEY-ECHÉZEAUX red
VOSNE-ROMANÉE red
NUITS-ST.-GEORGES red

Côte de Beaune

LADOIX-SERRIGNY red
ALOXE-CORTON white and red
CHOREY-LÈS-BEAUNE red
SAVIGNY-LÈS-BEAUNE red
BEAUNE white and red
POMMARD red
VOLNAY red
MONTHÉLIE red
MEURSAULT white
AUXEY-DURESSES white and red
PULIGNY-MONTRACHET white
CHASSAGNE-MONTRACHET white and red
SANTENAY red

                         CÔTE CHALONNAISE
RULLY white and red
MERCUREY predominantly red
GIVRY predominantly red
MONTAGNY white

                                 MÂCONNAIS
VERGISSON* white
SOLUTRÉ-POUILLY* white
FUISSÉ* white
CHAINTRÉ* white
ST.-VÉRAND** white

*One of the villages that produces the well-known wine Pouilly-Fuissé.
**The village that produces St.-Véran.



                 IT TAKES A RIVER… OR A POPE
    Burgundy has always been comparatively less well known than Bordeaux, largely due to its inland
    location. For most of history, wine has been transported over water—that is, if it hasn’t been completely
    consumed by the population at hand. As early as the thirteenth century, barrels of Bordeaux were being
    shipped down the Gironde Estuary, then out to sea, headed for England. But Burgundy, deep in France’s
    interior, was without a great waterway. Transporting its wines meant hauling heavy loads over potholed
    dirt roads. It wasn’t until the fourteenth century, when the papal court and residence moved from Rome
    to Avignon, in southern France, that Burgundy began to achieve recognition. Not surprisingly, the newly
    arrived pope and entourage of clerics were keen to drink the wines so intimately cared for by Burgundy’s
    monks. Demand soared. Later, as towns grew and roads got somewhat better, Burgundy’s fame spread.

   In 1789, the French Revolution ended forever the hegemony of the church and
Burgundy’s infamous dukes. Immense tracts of land were confiscated, split up, and
redistributed to the farmers who had worked those lands. Later, these small plots were
further fragmented as a result of the Napoleonic Code of 1804, which stipulated that upon
the death of a parent, all children must inherit equally. As a result of this successive
fragmentation, it’s not unusual today for a Burgundian to own just a few scant rows of
vines.
                            PLACE, NOT PERSON

The idea of terroir is a kind of mental construct that, at least in Burgundy, is inescapable.
You cannot think of the region simply in terms of pinot noir and chardonnay, for in the
most elemental sense, Burgundy is not about pinot noir and chardonnay. Pinot noir and
chardonnay are merely the voices through which the message of a site is expressed.
Indeed, it’s important to remember that there is no exact word in French for winemaker. In
Burgundy, the term most often used is vigneron, which means “vine grower.”
   To some, this distinction might seem awfully precious. Yet terroir—and, in Burgundy,
the incredible specificity of terroir—cannot be easily dismissed or avoided. Taste two
wines from the same domaine and you may find enormous differences between them.
How can these be explained when both wines were made by the same person, in the same
exact manner, from the same variety of grapes grown in the same way? The clearly
apparent variable, and the factor that reasonably seems responsible for those differences, is
place.
                                   LIEU-DIT AND CLIMAT
Two special wine terms are used in Burgundy (although only rarely elsewhere in France): lieu-dit (leh
DEE) and climat (KLEE ma). Lieu-dit (literally, “said location”) is the term used for a specific vineyard that
has an established name. A lieu-dit is usually tiny (smaller than an appellation or AOC) and usually not
inhabited. Sometimes the lieu-dit appears on the wine’s label along with the AOC. Lieux-dits do not
necessarily carry a rank, such as Premier or Grand Cru.
    The term climat is sometimes used interchangeably with lieu-dit, but the two are actually slightly
different. A climat is a specific parcel within a vineyard that has unique terroir characteristics. Most
climats are within classified vineyards. For example, the Grand Cru vineyard Clos de Vougeot has
sixteen climats that make it up. The name of a climat may appear on the label, as is the case with the
seven climats that make up the single vineyard Chablis Grand Cru (see Chablis, page 212).
       UNDERSTANDING HOW BURGUNDY WORKS

Burgundy is often thought of as one of the world’s most difficult wine regions to
understand (a distinction it shares with Germany). And it is complicated—especially when
compared to, say, California or Australia. But understanding Burgundy is a “road in” to
thinking about all fine wine at a deeper, more philosophical level. Here are eight key
points essential to beginning to understand Burgundy.
1 VIRTUALLY ALL WHITE BURGUNDY     is made exclusively from chardonnay, and virtually all
red Burgundy is made exclusively from pinot noir. (This said, the wines are so distinctive
that white Burgundy in particular has very little flavor resemblance with most of the
chardonnay made in the world today.) In Burgundy, at least for the top wines, chardonnay
is never blended with another variety, and neither is pinot noir.
2 AS MENTIONED, BURGUNDY     comprises four major regions—Chablis, the Côte d’Or, the
Côte Chalonnaise, and the Mâconnais (again, Beaujolais, the fifth region, technically
speaking, is given its own chapter following this chapter). The wines in these regions are
grouped into four levels. Starting with the most basic (least expensive) wine and moving
to the most sophisticated (and most expensive), the levels are:
• Burgundy Red and White: Bourgogne Rouge and Bourgogne Blanc, as they are known
to the French, are usually simple, basic regional wines, generally blends of various lots of
wine made from grapes of the same variety grown anywhere in the entire region of
Burgundy. Often, wines such as these lack the specificity of terroir that Burgundy is
acclaimed for, although they do have a basic regional character. These basic regional
wines account for 52 percent of Burgundy’s total production, and they are the most
affordable Burgundies. Finally, while basic white and red Burgundy have historically been
considered “entry wines” for the budget conscious, the quality of basic Burgundy has risen
dramatically in the past ten years, and wines like the basic Bourgogne Blanc of, say,
Domaine Leflaive or Pierre Matrot, are fantastic.
• Village Wine: This is where Burgundy begins to get dependably interesting. As the name
implies, a village wine is made entirely from grapes grown in and around that village. This
is a step up in price (and usually quality) from a regional wine because the grapes come
from a smaller, more well-defined place. The name of the village—Beaune, Volnay,
Gevrey-Chambertin, Pommard, Meursault, Nuits-St.-Georges, Chambolle-Musigny, and
so on—will appear on the label. There are forty-four villages, and the wines that come
from these account for 36 percent of Burgundy’s total production.
• Premier Cru: The smallest, most well-defined place of all is a vineyard. In 1861, the top
vineyards of Burgundy were classified as either Premier Cru—First Growth—or given an
even higher designation, Grand Cru. There are 629 Premier Cru vineyards. Wines from
these vineyards are invariably expensive. The name of the vineyard (which I have put in
quotes here for clarity) will appear on the label, after the name of the village; for example,
Beaune “Clos de la Mousse” or Gevrey-Chambertin “Aux Combottes.” Premier Cru wines
account for 10 percent of Burgundy’s total production.
Chambertin-Clos de Bèze, a Grand Cru vineyard in the village of Gevrey-Chambertin. A knockout in terms of its beauty,
                                the wine has sophistication, nuance, and restraint.

• Grand Cru: The highest designation a Burgundian vineyard can hold is Grand Cru—
Great Growth. Wines made from Grand Cru vineyards are the most treasured and
expensive wines in Burgundy and rank among the most costly wines in the world. In the
Côte d’Or, there are only thirty-two vineyards designated as Grand Cru, and there is one
Grand Cru in Chablis (more on this in a moment), for a final total of thirty-three Grands
Crus in the entire Burgundy region (see The 33 Grand Cru Vineyards of Burgundy, page
209). The Grands Crus are so famous that their names alone appear on the labels, along
with the words Grand Cru. Thus, for example, La Tâche and Le Musigny are Grand Cru
vineyards, but the label won’t mention the villages (Vosne-Romanée and Chambolle-
Musigny, respectively) where those vineyards are located. Wines from Grand Cru
vineyards account for just 2 percent of Burgundy’s total production.

                    THE ECCLESIASTIC WISDOM OF A SLOPE
     Long before the French appellation system was established in the twentieth century, the Benedictine and
     Cistercian monks of Burgundy had already begun to define, differentiate, and characterize the region’s
     vineyards and the quality of the wines that came from them. The wines from the lower part of the slope,
     which had the heaviest soils and suffered most in the rain, were known as the cuvées des moines (“wines
     for the monks”). Wines from the top of the slope, which had the least rain but where the sun did not have
     solar-panel-like focus, were called cuvées des cardinals (“wines for the cardinals”). Wines from the
     preferred, middle “thermal belt” of the slope, which had perfect sun orientation and where rain runs off,
     were called the cuvées des papes (“wines for the popes”).
                            THE GRAPES OF BURGUNDY
                                              WHITES
 ALIGOTÉ: Very minor grape. Grown principally in the Mâconnais, where it is used to make inexpensive
 quaffing wines, although some surprising examples can be found. This is the classic white with which a
 traditional Kir cocktail is made. Also a frequent component in the sparkling wine Crémant de Bourgogne.
 CHARDONNAY: Major grape. Used to make everything from simple wines like Pouilly-Fuissé and St.-
 Véran to Burgundy’s most profound and lush whites, including the wines of Chassagne-Montrachet,
 Puligny-Montrachet, and Meursault.

                                                 RED
 PINOT NOIR: Major grape. All of the red wines discussed in this chapter are made from this variety,
 including humble reds, such as Montagny and Givry, as well as the world-renowned wines from such
 villages as Chambolle-Musigny, Aloxe-Corton, and Vosne-Romanée.

    How would you know if the name on the label is a village name or a vineyard name?
Short of memorizing every village and vineyard in Burgundy, there’s no foolproof method.
However, a fairly good way of guessing is to know that vineyards are sometimes (but
admittedly not always) preceded by “the” (le or la in French). Thus, La Tâche, Le
Montrachet, and Le Chambertin are all vineyards, but Pommard, Beaune, and Volnay are
all villages.
    It’s also helpful to know that many Burgundian villages (but not vineyards) have
hyphenated names—like Chambolle-Musigny, Gevrey-Chambertin, and so on.
Interestingly, these hyphenated names have a purpose—the village has annexed the name
of its top vineyard in order to benefit from the prestige of that vineyard. Thus, Chambolle-
Musigny was originally called just Chambolle until it appended the name of its most
famous vineyard, Le Musigny, to its own name. Similarly, the village Aloxe added the
name of its renowned vineyard, Le Corton, to become the village of Aloxe-Corton, and the
village of Gevrey became Gevrey-Chambertin by incorporating the vineyard Le
Chambertin into its name. A hyphenated name on the label invariably means a village
wine.
3 YOU PROBABLY THINK    of a vineyard as that piece of land owned by a single vintner. In
other words, vineyards are commonly defined by the legal construct of ownership. Even
though the property within a vineyard may contain highly variable terroir, it is still
considered one vineyard when it’s owned by one person. The opposite holds true in
Burgundy. There, the boundaries of most vineyards were established centuries ago by
monks attempting to define parcels of ground solely on the basis of terroir. To the monks,
what in the modern world would be considered one vineyard could be two, four, ten, or
more vineyards, depending upon the number of different terroirs the monks observed.
Each of those distinct vineyards, an entity unto itself, would have been different—
sometimes decidedly so—from neighboring vineyards.
4 SINCE VINEYARDS IN BURGUNDY    are defined by their terroirs, not necessarily by who owns
them, ownership itself takes on a different spin. Although it’s a bit hard to picture at first,
most vineyards in Burgundy, even the tiniest ones, have more than one owner. Perhaps the
most well-known example is the Grand Cru vineyard Clos de Vougeot. At 125 acres (50
hectares; less than half the size of, say, Château Lafite-Rothschild in Bordeaux), Clos de
Vougeot has eighty owners. Each of these owners makes a wine called Clos de Vougeot.
By way of a simple analogy, a Burgundian vineyard is like a condominium. There are
several owners, all of whom own distinct parts of the condominium. Still, each of the
separate parts is a portion of the same condominium.




Domaine J. Grivot’s entrance to their section of Burgundy’s Grand Cru vineyard Clos de Vougeot. The vineyard has 80
                                                    owners in all.

5 A HANDFUL OF VINEYARDS          have only one owner. These vineyards are known as
monopoles. They are rare.
6 AS YOU CAN SEE,   the conventional, tidy image of a wine estate surrounded by vineyards
isn’t really applicable to Burgundy. Instead, most growers own many small parcels of
many different vineyards in many different villages. For the top wines, although not for
the basic ones, the grapes from those parcels will almost never be blended together, even
though they might all be the same variety—say, pinot noir. Instead, the grower will make a
separate pinot noir from each village and/or vineyard. Indeed, growers often own parcels
of several different vineyards within the same village. The grower Domaine Roumier, for
example, makes three wines from the village of Chambolle-Musigny: a village wine—
Domaine Roumier Chambolle-Musigny; a Premier Cru—Domaine Roumier Chambolle-
Musigny “Les Amoureuses”; and a Grand Cru—Domaine Roumier Le Musigny. And
those are just the wines the domaine makes from one village. Domaine Roumier also has
vineyard holdings in several other villages.
                               BURGUNDIAN WINEMAKING
           In the New World, wines are sometimes said to be made using “Burgundian methods.”
           What does that mean exactly? In general, it involves the following:
           HARVESTING THE WINE in small lots and then making each lot separately
           USING INDIGENOUS YEASTS (that is, not adding commercial yeasts)
           BARREL FERMENTATION OF WHITE WINES
           MALOLACTIC FERMENTATION OF WHITE WINES
           LONG LEES CONTACT (sur lie) and stirring of the lees (bâtonnage) of white wines
           SMALL, OPEN-TOPPED FERMENTERS for red wine
           VERY GENTLE and minimal handling of the wine after it is made
           FINING WITH CASEIN OR ISINGLASS for chardonnay; egg whites for pinot noir
           FIFTEEN TO EIGHTEEN MONTHS OF AGING in small oak barrels, usually not 100
           percent new

   Why go to the added trouble and expense of making, aging, bottling, marketing, and
selling multiple pinot noirs when you could blend them together and make just one pinot
noir, as much of the rest of the world does? It’s a matter of philosophy and purpose. For
wines above the level of basic Bourgogne, the Burgundian grower’s goal is to let the
personality of the place emanate through the wine. Making one large blend would
obliterate the differences in flavor and aroma derived from place. Still, it’s a decision with
practical consequences, for vineyard parcels can be tiny. It is not unusual for a grower to
own just a few rows of vines, enough perhaps to make but a single barrel (twenty-five
cases) of wine from that appellation.




 The “backyard” of pinot noir vines behind Domaine de L’Arlot in Nuits-St.-Georges. Below the house are some of the
                                      most enchanting old cellars in the village.
                                  THE D’OR IN CÔTE D’OR
    The name Côte d’Or is often translated as “golden slope,” perhaps because the wines from here cost a
    ransom, or perhaps because the vineyards turn golden in autumn. However, the term is actually a
    contraction of Côte d’Orient, “eastern-facing slope”—a reference to the fact that the vineyards face east
    to catch each day’s morning sun.

7 IN TERMS OF  their sensory characteristics, Burgundies don’t lend themselves to quick
evaluation. The wines are extremely elegant, highly nuanced, and often rather ethereal.
They require a lot of concentration on the part of the taster. It’s not uncommon (even for
professional tasters) to have to delve deep into their sensory aptitude in order to grasp each
wine.
8 UNTIL THE 1980S, most of the commerce in Burgundian wine was controlled by powerful
brokers known as négociants. The négociants rose to power after the French Revolution,
when fragmented ownership of small parcels of land in Burgundy made it economically
and physically difficult for small growers to bottle, market, and sell their own wine.
   Traditionally, négociants bought (negotiated for) dozens if not hundreds of small lots of
wine from numerous growers, then blended these lots into several wines, bottled them,
and sold them under their own labels. A négociant house, such as Louis Jadot, would buy
many tiny lots of Gevrey-Chambertin to bottle a Louis Jadot Gevrey-Chambertin, and
many lots of Pommard to bottle a Louis Jadot Pommard. The négociant would, of course,
also buy many lots of a Premier Cru vineyard. For example, Louis Jadot might buy several
lots of the Premier Cru vineyard Les Amoureuses (the name means “the women in love”)
and make a Louis Jadot Chambolle-Musigny “Les Amoureuses.” Generally speaking, the
négociants of the past owned few—if any—vineyards themselves.
  REVOLUTION RECOVERY: BURGUNDY BROKEN; BORDEAUX
                 BACK IN BUSINESS
 Burgundy is full of tiny vineyard estates—some less than 3 acres (1.2 hectares) in size. Bordeaux, on the
 other hand, is made up of many large estates—Château Mouton-Rothschild, for example, is 208 acres
 (84 hectares); Château Lafite-Rothschild is 272 acres (110 hectares). Why are Burgundy’s vineyards so
 small, and Bordeaux’s so large comparatively?
    Burgundy’s far smaller geography and remote location deep in the center of France are certainly both
 factors. But a far greater one was this: By the end of the seventeenth century, Burgundy’s vineyards were
 owned primarily by the Roman Catholic Church. This made Burgundy distinctly different from Bordeaux,
 a large, commercially successful, sophisticated area where vineyard estates were owned by wealthy
 merchants and aristocrats. With the French Revolution of 1789 to 1799, the course of Burgundy’s future
 changed radically. To establish principles of equality and redistribute wealth, the new state ended the
 French monarchy and confiscated the church’s holdings, breaking up vineyards into tiny parcels and
 auctioning them off to local peasants. To further strengthen the new state, in 1804, Napoléon Bonaparte
 issued the Napoleonic Code, a set of sweeping civil laws, including one that barred privilege based on
 birth order, and mandated that all children must inherit equally. (As a result, in Burgundy today, some
 members of a family each own just a few rows of vines.)
    In Bordeaux, the revolution and its tumultuous Reign of Terror had a different impact. All four of the
 most prestigious châteaux (Margaux, Lafite-Rothschild, Latour, and Haut-Brion) were confiscated,
 divided, and, in three cases, their owners beheaded. But Bordeaux’s properties had been important
 financial institutions (the equivalent of the corporations that today are deemed too big to fail). In the wake
 of the Revolution—and often through graft and insider deals among the bankers and architects of the
 new French state—the properties were reassembled more or less to their original size. Eventually these
 were resold to rich merchants or, in the case of Lafite, a foreign corporation that sold shares (at the time
 a radical idea) to acquire it. By the third decade of the nineteenth century, Bordeaux was back in
 business, but Burgundy, broken up, was more isolated than ever.

   By the 1960s and 1970s, however, the négociant business began to change. Many small
growers—even the tiniest ones—decided to bottle their wines under their own labels,
leaving fewer available sources of grapes for négociants to buy. The wines many
négociants produced began to suffer in quality. To remedy this, négociant houses
increasingly became growers themselves. Louis Jadot, for example, owned one small
vineyard when it was founded in 1859. Today the firm has 519 acres (210 hectares) of
vineyards and makes wines from more than ninety appellations. However, with the
exception of a few top négociant houses, such as Louis Jadot (which makes extraordinary
Burgundies), large négociant wines are often considered far less exciting than the wines
from small domaines.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Just driving down the Côte d’Or’s famous main wine road—RN74—reveals how
intimately connected growers are to the land and portends just how site specific the wines
can be. On the slopes above each tiny village, instead of vast tracts of vineyards, the thick
carpet of vines is parcelled into paddocklike plots, often enclosed by field-stone walls. To
encourage competition among them, the vines are closely spaced—about 4,000 plants per
acre (.4 hectare). As astounding as this seems, it is not as dense as plantings once were.
Before phylloxera, for example, vines in Burgundy were not planted in rows, but simply
helter skelter in a tight fashion—a manner that suited the monks who tended the vines by
hand. It wasn’t until horses were employed in the work that planting in straight rows
became commonplace. Today, thanks to the huge number of tiny plots owned by different
growers, the visual effect of the vineyards, even from a short distance, is that of a
patchwork quilt of vibrant green. Together, all of these tiny vineyards amount to just over
66,000 acres (26,700 hectares) of vines. By comparison, Bordeaux, with over 290,000
acres (117,400 hectares), is nearly four and a half times larger.
   The region is composed of four main sub-regions. We’ll look at these individually,
beginning on page 212, but for now, here’s a very brief overview:




                          In Burgundy, pinot noir is held in absolute reverence.

CHABLIS This is the northernmost subregion of Burgundy, just 100 or so miles (160
kilometers) southeast of Paris. Chablis is entirely devoted to growing chardonnay grapes.
CÔTE D’OR  Most of Burgundy’s legendary wines (and most of the Grand Crus) come from
the Côte d’Or, the collective name for the Côte de Nuits and the Côte de Beaune. The Côte
d’Or is a 30-mile-long (48-kilometer) limestone escarpment, or ridge, with villages on the
eastern side of the slope. Because the vines primarily face east, they are perfectly oriented
to catch the morning sun each day. The Côte de Nuits (the northern half of the escarpment)
is planted virtually entirely with pinot noir, and hence makes red wines only. The Côte de
Beaune (the southern half) is planted with both pinot noir and chardonnay, and makes both
red and white wines.
CÔTE CHALONNAISE     Just south of the Côte d’Or is the Côte Chalonnaise, which while not
as famous as its sisters, nonetheless produces some quite good, reasonably priced red and
white wines.
MÂCONNAIS    Moving south from the Côte Chalonnaise, you come next to the Mâconnais, a
fairly large region devoted to making oceans of good, everyday, inexpensive chardonnay,
as well as a handful of finer chardonnays. The three most well-known wines are Mâcon-
Villages, Pouilly-Fuissé, and St.-Véran.
PLUS BEAUJOLAIS   From a government administration point of view, Beaujolais is also
considered a subregion within Burgundy. But because Beaujolais has little in common
with the rest of Burgundy, it has its own chapter, beginning on page 227.
    Because the entire Burgundy region is 140 miles (225 kilometers) from north to south,
each of these subregions has many specific characteristics of climate and soil that define
it. But in general, what makes Burgundy Burgundy are two enormously important
realities. First, it is a cool place. As I mentioned earlier, of all the regions in the world that
are famous for red wine, Burgundy is the most northern. Summers here are generally
cooler than in Bordeaux and much cooler than in most of California. And because
Burgundy is a cool place, its wines are not massive, syrupy, and overtly fruity. Instead, at
their best they are intensely flavored but have a light to medium body and an almost
gossamer gracefulness.
   THE 33 GRAND CRU VINEYARDS OF BURGUNDY
There are thirty-two Grand Cru vineyards in the Côte d’Or, plus one in Chablis, for a
total of thirty-three. They are listed here from north to south. The village where each
Grand Cru vineyard is located follows in parentheses.
CHABLIS GRAND CRU (Chablis)
CHAMBERTIN CLOS-DE-BÈZE (Gevrey-Chambertin)
CHAPELLE-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
CHARMES-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
GRIOTTE-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
LATRICIÈRES-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
LE CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
MAZIS-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
MAZOYÈRES-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
RUCHOTTES-CHAMBERTIN (Gevrey-Chambertin)
BONNES MARES (part in Morey-St.-Denis; part in Chambolle-Musigny)
CLOS DE LA ROCHE (Morey-St.-Denis)
CLOS DES LAMBRAYS (Morey-St.-Denis)
CLOS DE TART (Morey-St.-Denis)
CLOS ST.-DENIS (Morey-St.-Denis)
LE MUSIGNY (Chambolle-Musigny)
CLOS DE VOUGEOT (Vougeot)
ECHÉZEAUX (Vosne-Romanée)
GRANDS ECHÉZEAUX (Vosne-Romanée)
LA ROMANÉE (Vosne-Romanée)
LA TÂCHE (Vosne-Romanée)
LA GRANDE RUE (Vosne-Romanée)
RICHEBOURG (Vosne-Romanée)
ROMANÉE-CONTI (Vosne-Romanée)
ROMANÉE-ST.-VIVANT (Vosne-Romanée)
CHARLEMAGNE (Aloxe-Corton)
CORTON-CHARLEMAGNE (part in Pernand-Vergelesses; part in Aloxe-Corton; part in
Ladoix-Serrigny)
LE CORTON (part in Pernand-Vergelesses; part in Aloxe-Corton; part in Ladoix-
Serrigny)
BÂTARD-MONTRACHET (part in Puligny-Montrachet; part in Chassagne-Montrachet)
BIENVENUES-BÂTARD-MONTRACHET (Puligny-Montrachet)
CHEVALIER-MONTRACHET (Puligny-Montrachet)
LE MONTRACHET (part in Puligny-Montrachet; part in Chassagne-Montrachet)
CRIOTS-BÂTARD-MONTRACHET (Chassagne-Montrachet)
                        DOMAINE DE LA ROMANÉE-CONTI
 The most-renowned estate in Burgundy, perhaps in all of France, Domaine de la Romanée-Conti, has
 been the subject of entire books. The DRC, as it is referred to, is owned by the de Villaine and Leroy
 families and is made up of parcels of seven vineyards, all of which are Grands Crus and all of which
 have been considered exemplary for centuries. These include one vineyard devoted to white wine, Le
 Montrachet, and six devoted to red: Romanée-Conti and La Tâche (both of which are monopoles, owned
 exclusively by the domaine), as well as Richebourg, Romanée-St.-Vivant, Echézeaux, and Grands
 Echézeaux. Together these seven holdings make up just a little more than 62 acres (25 hectares) of
 vines. Because the yields from these vineyards are kept extremely low, production is minuscule. The
 entire production of the DRC’s wine from the Romanée-Conti vineyard is a mere six thousand bottles
 (five hundred cases) a year. This is about 1/40 the production of Château Lafite-Rothschild in Bordeaux.
 As for cost, year in and year out the wines of the DRC are the most expensive in Burgundy. Vintages in
 the mid-2000s (2004–2007) sold at auction for $6,500 to $10,500 a bottle.

   Burgundy’s cool climate also means that the region is well suited to pinot noir and
chardonnay. Worldwide experience with pinot noir suggests that the grape will produce
wines that possess finesse, nuance, and complexity only when it is planted in a cool place,
so that the grapes are allowed to ripen slowly and methodically over a relatively long
period of time. (Pinot noir planted in hot, sun-drenched areas produces unfocused, dull
wines that taste like flat cola.) As for white Burgundies, while chardonnay can be, and is,
planted in quite warm places around the world, many knowledgeable chardonnay lovers
would argue that the most nuanced and elegant wines come from grapes that are grown in
cooler spots.

      “[Chambolle Musigny] is a wine of silk and lace; supremely delicate with no
      hint of violence yet much hidden strength.”
                                                                    — GASTON ROUPNEL
                                                                    French poet (1871–1946)

    Because of Burgundy’s cool northern climate, achieving ripeness is a concern, and thus
it’s no surprise that for the best wines, yields must be kept low (vineyards maxed out by
trying to ripen too much fruit end up not ripening any of it very well).
    Another concern is deciding when to pick. In Burgundy, it often rains in early fall.
Growers who pick early in the season might avoid rain, but the slightly underripe grapes
they harvest might also produce thin, bland wines that no amount of winemaking wizardry
will improve. Growers who pick late are gambling that they can dodge the rain, thus
letting the grapes benefit from a longer ripening time, with richer wines as the result. But
such growers are also betting that if it does indeed rain, they’ll be able to harvest the crop
before the grapes get waterlogged or before a serious rot sets in.
       In the small, cool, damp, dark, often earthen-floored cellars of Burgundy, pinot noir ages gracefully.

   Of course, growers who pick early can chaptalize—a practice that’s legal in Burgundy.
Chaptalization involves adding plain old sugar to the fermenting vat. This, in turn, gives
the yeasts more material to ferment. And the more sugar the yeasts have to ferment, the
fuller in body (and higher in alcohol) the wine will be. It’s safe to say that top producers
avoid chaptalization, since wines with high alcohol but meek flavors can often taste out of
balance and discombobulated.
   What else makes Burgundy Burgundy? Limestone and limestone-rich clays called
marls. In many areas—especially in the Côte d’Or and in Chablis—limestone rocks
embedded with visible sea fossils are scattered everywhere in the vineyards, and
outcroppings reveal entire blocks of fractured limestone under the barest minimum of
topsoil. This particular limestone (with sea fossils) is known as Kimmeridgian limestone,
since it dates from the Kimmeridgian period within the Jurassic epoch. Tiny filaments of
roots burrow between the crevices of these limestone blocks, going down to depths
reaching 70 feet (20 meters) or more. In Burgundy, it is common wisdom that such
limestone is the source of both red and white wines’ vivid minerality.
  No one describes the soil more poetically than Anthony Hanson, in his authoritative
book Burgundy:
During the Jurassic period (135–195 million years ago), the whole of Burgundy sank
beneath shallow seas. Archaeopteryx, or some other ancestral bird, took wing, great
dinosaurs roamed the land, while on the sea bed, marine sediments were slowly laid down.
The shells of myriads of baby oysters piled one on another, while the skeletons of countless
crinoids or sea lilies were compacted together; from such petrified remains, limestone is
formed. Jurassic limestone rocks, interspersed with marlstones, are fundamental keys to
the excellence and variety of Burgundy’s wines.
   And finally, a few more words about the grapes.
   Although it’s hard to imagine now, until the modern wine revolution of the 1950s and
1960s, chardonnay and pinot noir were hardly heard of outside central France. Just a
smattering of acres/hectares existed in the entire New World. Today, of course, that has all
changed. California alone has slightly more than 950,000 acres (384,500 hectares) of
chardonnay and nearly 40,000 acres (16,200 hectares) of pinot noir. Factor in Australia,
New Zealand, South America, and other U.S. states like Oregon and Washington, and both
of these once rare Burgundian varieties are very much on wine’s contemporary world
stage.
   Yet chardonnay and pinot noir don’t merely grow in Burgundy; Burgundy is where
chardonnay and pinot noir reach dizzying heights of beauty and individuality. Indeed, the
Burgundian versions of both of these grapes stand distinctly apart from wines elsewhere
that are made from the same varieties. A lifetime of experience with California
chardonnay, for example, would give you little idea of what to expect from a white
Burgundy. And it’s not a matter of a special group of clones. Vineyards in Burgundy today
are planted and replanted as they have been for centuries—not by planting selected
individual clones, but rather by the method known as massale selection (taking cuttings
from numerous vines within a vineyard and using buds from all of them to begin a new
vineyard, thus replicating the original vineyard’s genetic diversity).
                                             CHABLIS

The northernmost subregion of Burgundy, Chablis sits like an isolated island far north of
the Côte d’Or and the rest of Burgundy. In fact, the vineyards of Chablis are closer to
Champagne, about 20 miles (32 kilometers) away, than they are to the rest of Burgundy,
more than 60 miles (97 kilometers) away. This far north, Chablis’s harsh, wet, and very
cold temperatures are influenced by the Atlantic Ocean, and frosts in both spring and fall
shorten the growing season. The wines, not surprisingly, are so crisp and racy that they
vibrate with spring-loaded acidity.
   The place itself is amazing looking. Vineyards roll this way and that, as if they grew on
ocean waves. The whitish, crusty limestone soil—full of baby oyster shells and crinoids
entroques (cousins of sea lilies and starfish)—is so stark that at twilight you feel as though
you’re on the moon.

                              CHARDONNAY—THE PLACE
    One of the historic, tiny villages in the Mâconnais region of Burgundy is called Chardonnay. The name is
    derived from the Latin Cardonnacum, which in turn comes from carduus, Latin for “a place with
    thistles.” (Carduus is the genus for ninety species of thistles.) Interestingly, during the Roman era, a
    nobleman named Cardus is also thought to have owned the area where the village now exists. The village
    of Chardonnay and the surrounding Mâconnais region may indeed be where chardonnay was born as a
    natural crossing. DNA typing reveals chardonnay’s parents to be the red grape pinot noir and the white
    grape gouais blanc.

   While Chablis was justifiably famous in the late nineteenth century (its proximity to
Paris ensured its reputation as a brasserie favorite), the wine is perhaps less well known
today. The area, which suffered tremendously during the phylloxera crisis, had a difficult
time regaining financial stability, and with the establishment of France’s major railway
systems, cheaper, heartier wines were easily shipped north, weakening Chablis’s position
even further. That said, the 2000s saw a resurgence of its popularity, perhaps because the
minerally, steely flavors, exuberant freshness, and kinetic feel of Chablis are wholly
different from chardonnay made anywhere else in the world, and thus the wine has, in a
commercial sense, little competition. The French often call the unique flavors of a good
Chablis goût de pierre à fusil—gunflint. When, with a great Premier or Grand Cru
Chablis, these gunflint flavors are spliced by edgy minerality, the effect can be sensational.
   Most Chablis are made entirely in stainless steel to preserve the purity of their flavors.
Some domaines ferment in stainless steel but go on to briefly age their Chablis in small,
used oak barrels in order to deepen the wine’s flavors. Still other producers (a small
number) barrel ferment their Chablis, especially their Grands Crus, which are thought to
be intense enough to stand up to the oak’s impact.
    Chablis has numerous Premier Crus and one Grand Cru—a magnificent sweeping
hillside of Kimmeridgian limestone and marl covering 247 acres (100 hectares).
Somewhat confusingly, the Grand Cru is known by the seven contiguous parcels—climats
—situated along the hillside (leading some to imagine there are seven Grands Crus).
These parcels are Blanchot, Bougros, Grenouilles, Les Clos, Les Preuses, Valmur, and
Vaudésir. A bottle of Grand Cru Chablis will list one of these names on the label along
with the words “Chablis Grand Cru.”
                    SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF CHABLIS
   Alice et Olivier de Moor • Billaud-Simon • Christian Moreau Père et Fils • Jean Dauvissat • Jean-Marc
  Brocard • Jean-Paul & Benoît Droin • Laroche • Louis Michel et Fils • Pattes Loup • Raveneau • René et
                     Vincent Dauvissat • Servin • Verget • Vocoret et Fils • William Fèvre
                               THE CÔTE D’OR

The 30-mile-long, 1,000-foot-high (48-kilometer, 305-meter) escarpment known as the
Côte d’Or is Burgundy’s most renowned wine region. When wine drinkers talk about
being left spellbound by Burgundy, they are almost assuredly talking about wines from
here.
   The Côte d’Or is a narrow ridge of limestone, divided almost equally in half. The
northern part, known as the Côte de Nuits, produces red wines almost exclusively. The
southern half, the Côte de Beaune, produces both red and white wines, although whites—
including the ultra-famous wines Puligny-Montrachet and Chassagne-Montrachet—
dominate. (For the villages in each part, see The Villages of Burgundy, page 200.) In
between the Côte de Nuits and the Côte de Beaune is the village of Comblanchien—
famous not for wine, but for its dusty quarries full of Comblanchien limestone and marble.
    SERVING BURGUNDY—A FEW SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS
 Serving a great Burgundy, white or red, in too small a glass is considered a crime. Burgundies are, by
 their nature, aromatic wines. The only way to experience the full impact of these wines is to drink them
 from generous glasses with ample bowls that taper toward the top.
    Know, too, that Burgundies are among the wines in the world that change a lot after being poured. In
 fact, it’s almost impossible to accurately assess a great Burgundy after the first one or two sips. In twenty
 minutes, the wine may be transformed substantially, offering a whole new world of flavors and aromas.
 For many wine drinkers, this propensity to evolve in the glass is part of what makes top Burgundy
 intellectually intriguing.
     With a fine red Burgundy, the wine’s inclination to evolve and the relative fragility of the pinot noir
 grape mean that, in general, you should not open the bottle many hours before dinner or, worse, decant
 it. Pinot noir is the complete opposite of cabernet sauvignon in this regard. When pinot noir, especially a
 pinot that is ten years old or more, is given too much oxygen, its flavors can seem to fade and fall apart.
 So pour red Burgundy from the bottle (not a decanter) and drink it soon after it’s opened.




Tasting in the cellars of Aurelien Verdet. Every Burgundian domaine, no matter how humble, serves their Burgundies in
                                           good, thin-rimmed, generous glasses.

   Every village in the Côte d’Or is said to have its own character—the wines of
Chambolle-Musigny, for example, are frequently considered among the most elegant pinot
noirs, while the pinots of Nuits-St.-Georges are thought to be more structured.
   There is one broad generalization that can be made concerning red wines: The top reds
from the Côte de Nuits (Gevrey-Chambertin, Flagey-Echézeaux, Vosne-Romanée, Nuits-
St.-Georges, and others) often have greater intensity and a firmer structure than red wines
from the Côte de Beaune (Aloxe-Corton, Beaune, Volnay, Pommard, and so on). By
contrast, the top Côte de Beaune reds are frequently softer and sometimes more lush. In
general, reds from all over the Côte d’Or are prized for their soaring, earthy flavors, often
laced with minerals, exotic spices, licorice, or truffles. Of all the red wines in the world,
these are some of the most heady in aroma and long in the mouth. They are also some of
the most frail in color. (As with all pinot noirs, the intensity of a red Burgundy’s color is
not a reflection of the intensity of its flavor.)




   The church spire and bell tower in Savigny-lès-Beaune in the Côte de Beaune. The long and intimate relationship
                          between wine and religion is evident in every Burgundian village.

   As for white wines (again, all of which come from the Côte de Beaune), the most
famous villages are Meursault, Puligny-Montrachet, Chassagne-Montrachet, Ladoix-
Serrigny, and Beaune. The top Premier and Grand Cru wines from these villages can be
amazingly rich and concentrated without being heavy or ponderous. Their tightly woven
flavors are dripping with hints of toasted nuts, truffles, and vanilla. A wine such as the
Grand Cru Corton-Charlemagne from Domaine Bonneau du Martray, for example, can
have such exquisite elegance, it’s toe curling.
   The word côte is translated as “slope,” and where a vineyard is located on the slope of
the Côte d’Or is usually a clue to its rank. The humblest place to be on the slope is at the
bottom. Village wines generally come from these bottom-slope or flatland vineyards. Here
the soil is heaviest, least well drained, and most full of clay. A better place to be on the
slope is on the top third. The soil is thinner and there’s more limestone, but the sun is not
entirely ideal (many Premier Cru vineyards are on the top third of the slope). The best
vineyards of all—and where the Grands Crus are located—are those vineyards that are
mid-slope. Here, the limestone and marl is abundant and there’s a solar-panel-like 45-
degree exposure to sun throughout the day. This midslope area is often called the thermal
belt.

                           WHITE BURGUNDY AND LOBSTER
     Move over Champagne and caviar. Among the world’s most indulgent and sensational food-and-wine
     combinations is surely a Premier Cru or Grand Cru white Burgundy, especially an opulent Puligny-
     Montrachet or Chassagne-Montrachet, with Maine lobster drizzled with butter. When the sweet, rich
     creaminess of the wine meets the sweet, rich meatiness of the lobster, well, if you don’t die of poverty first,
     you’ll die from the pleasure.
               SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF THE CÔTE D’OR
     There are hundreds of producers in the Côte d’Or alone. Here are some of my favorite domaines.
Armand Rousseau • Aurélien Verdet • Bonneau du Martray • Christian Sérafin • Clos de Tart • Coche-Dury •
 Comte Armand • Comte Georges de Vogüé • Comtes Lafon • Daniel Rion • Denis Mortet • Domaine de la
Pousse d’Or • Domaine de l’Arlot • Domaine de la Romanée-Conti • Dujac • Jean Grivot • Etienne Sauzet •
Georges Roumier • Henri Jayer • J. Confuron-Cotetidot • Jean-Marc Morey • Leflaive • Leroy • Perrot Minot
  • Ponsot • J. F. Mugnier • Jean-Noël Gagnard • Joseph Drouhin • Louis Jadot • Méo-Camuzet • Michel
Lafarge • Mongeard-Mugneret • Paul Pernot • Philippe Colin • Philippe Leclerc • Pierre Gelin • Pierre Matrot
                               • Ramonet • René Leclerc • Tollot-Beaut et Fils
                                  CÔTE CHALONNAISE

A few miles/kilometers south of the Côte d’Or is the Côte Chalonnaise, also devoted to
both chardonnay and pinot noir wines. There are five main wine villages here: Mercurey,
Bouzeron, Rully, Givry, and Montagny. In addition to wines from these villages, much
basic Bourgogne is also produced here. There are no Grand Cru vineyards in the Côte
Chalonnaise. There are, however, numerous Premiers Crus.
   The wines of the Côte Chalonnaise are almost always less expensive than the wines of
the Côte d’Or, so this is the subregion bargain hunters love to explore. Of course,
Chalonnaise wines generally don’t match the Côte d’Or in quality either. But delicious
surprises can crop up, especially from the top producers.
   The area’s best-known and largest village, Mercurey, can produce very good pinot noirs
with lots of spicy cherry character (although there are also Mercureys that are watery and
weak). And while Mercurey is thought of as a red-wine village, it also produces a small
amount of lovely, appley, minerally chardonnay.




The winemakers of Domaine Laroche taste their exquisite Chablis. The domaine makes filigreed, minerally Chablis that
         taste of ocean air and ancient seabeds. Their Grand Cru Chablis in particular are show stoppers.
            THE HÔTEL DIEU AND THE HOSPICES DE BEAUNE
 One of the most prestigious wine events anywhere is the Hospices de Beaune, a charity auction held
 each November in Beaune’s stunning Hôtel Dieu (literally, “God’s House”). Built in 1443 by Nicolas Rolin,
 chancellor of the duchy of Burgundy, and his wife, Guigone de Salins, the Hôtel Dieu is perhaps the most
 magnificent refuge ever created for the sick and the destitute. Its numerous enormous rooms include
 large galleries with curtained bed chambers where the sick slept, two to a bed (for warmth), chapels for
 the bedridden to attend daily Mass, grand kitchens, and a pharmacy outfitted with distillation stills for the
 making of medicines. The building’s steep roof is covered in dazzlingly colored glazed tiles and can be
 seen from miles away. Sunlight hitting the roof creates a halo of amazing light. The Hôtel Dieu (now a
 museum and wine domaine) owns almost 150 acres (60 hectares) of vineyards (much of it classified as
 Premier or Grand Cru), which have been donated to it over centuries. Each year since 1851, the wines
 made from these vineyards have been sold in a highly publicized auction that brings in considerable
 sums to benefit the hospitals of Beaune.

   Bouzeron is the northernmost village of the Côte Chalonnaise. It is known primarily for
aligoté. In fact, perhaps the best wine made from aligoté in France is produced here, by
Aubert de Villaine, codirector of the prestigious Domaine de la Romanée-Conti in the
Côte d’Or.
    The village of Rully used to be one of the centers of sparkling wine production in
Burgundy, and a fair amount of Crémant de Bourgogne (a sparkling wine produced using
the Champagne method) is still produced there. Otherwise, the village is known mostly for
its simple pinot noirs and somewhat better chardonnays, which can be crisp and lemony,
with nutty overtones.
   Givry is better known for its pinot noirs, although chardonnays also come from there.
Quality, of course, depends on the producer, but there are some very good wines with
earthy and cherry flavors.
   Finally, Montagny, the small, southernmost village of the Côte Chalonnaise, is
exclusively devoted to chardonnay. Many Burgundy insiders consider Montagnys the best-
value white Burgundies going, and this village has the highest number of Premiers Crus in
the Côte Chalonnaise—forty-nine. Indeed, about two-thirds of the 740 acres (300
hectares) here are ranked Premier Cru and encompass more than fifty named sites.
Because of the high proportion of top-rated vineyards within this single, small appellation,
the significance of naming the individual vineyard is diluted. Thus, unlike the rest of
Burgundy, a majority of Montagny Premier Cru wine is sold without reference to a
specific vineyard.
         SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF THE CÔTE CHALONNAISE
 A. & P. de Villaine • Dureuil-Janthial • François Raquillet • J. M. Boillot • Joblot • Louis Jadot • Louis Latour •
                                                   Meix-Foulot
 Perhaps more than any other place in the world, Burgundy is vulnerable to vintages of widely differing quality.
Nonetheless, to come upon a stash of really old Burgundy excites the imagination in a way few other wines ever do.
                                          MÂCONNAIS

South of the Côte Chalonnaise is the Mâconnais, a large area of low-lying hills,
woodlands, farmland, and meadows. Some soils here are limestone and marl, but toward
the southern end, granite and schist are also found. The top three Mâconnais (all made
from chardonnay) are: Mâcon, Pouilly-Fuissé, and St.-Véran. Oceans of basic, serviceable
chardonnay are also made. There are no Grands Crus or Premiers Crus in the Mâconnais.
   Mâcon is found as either simple Mâcon (about 80 percent of production; much of it
from cooperatives) or the even better Mâcon-Villages. And, in one further step up, twenty-
six villages have the right to append their names to the word Mâcon: Mâcon-Lugny,
Mâcon-Viré, Mâcon-Fuissé, and so on.
    Pouilly-Fuissé, the most highly thought of appellation within the Mâconnais thanks to
its generous limestone soils, comes from the area around the four small hamlets of
Vergisson, Solutré-Pouilly, Fuissé, and Chaintré. PR got to Pouilly-Fuissé early on, and
some producers’ wines are dreadful and overpriced. But the top Pouilly-Fuissés are bold,
dense chardonnays—delicious, although never as elegant as the hugely more expensive
top whites of the Côte d’Or. (Don’t confuse Pouilly-Fuissé with Pouilly-Fumé. The latter
is a sauvignon blanc from France’s Loire Valley.) And last, from the village of St.-Vérand
comes the wine St.-Véran (minus the d in its name), which is usually less expensive than
Pouilly-Fuissé, and sometimes better.




              SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF THE MÂCONNAIS
   Château Fuissé • Daniel Barraud • de Bongran • des Comtes Lafon • Guffens-Heynen • J. A. Ferret •
              Joseph Drouhin • Louis Jadot • Robert Denogent • Roger Lassarat • Valette


                                   WHERE’S THE BOEUF?
    Burgundy’s famous boeuf bourguignon is a slowly braised beef stew made with local Charolais beef,
    pearl onions, mushrooms, bits of fried bacon, and a whole bottle of Burgundy wine. Needless to say, no
    sane cook—and certainly no Burgundian cook, since most of them are known for their thriftiness—
    would pour a Premier Cru or Grand Cru into the pot. No, the stew is made with a basic Burgundy,
    something that won’t require the cook to pawn the family silver. The Burgundy you drink with the stew,
well, that’s a different story. In the end, however, it’s the combination that counts, and a rich, winey stew
of slowly braised beef is one of the most stunning partners a bottle of great Burgundy could have.
       BUYING BURGUNDY AND THE QUESTION OF
                    VINTAGES

Depending on your viewpoint (and the amount of money you can afford to lose on some
wines that may prove disappointing), buying Burgundy is either frightening or exciting,
for there are few absolutes that can be counted on. Indeed, buying Burgundy is a matter of
trial and error, luck, intuition, and, you hope, some good advice. Actually, there is one
absolute: Bargain Burgundies do not exist. Like caviar, the top Burgundies are dependably
expensive.
   You might logically think that Grands Crus are better than Premiers Crus and that
Premiers Crus are better than village wines. While this is a solid, historically based idea
that often proves to be the case, there are also times when it’s a wrong assumption.
Burgundy, alas, is the ultimate moving target.
   Then there’s the issue of aging. Burgundies can take on remarkably different qualities
as they age. There is no good rule of thumb for knowing when a given Burgundy will
move into the scrumptious zone (or even if it will), for Burgundy rarely ages in a linear,
predictable way.
   And, of course, buying Burgundy encourages you to consider the place as much as, if
not more than, the producer. A wine from the village of Chambolle-Musigny traditionally
tastes quite different from a wine from the village of Nuits-St.-Georges. It’s fascinating to
try to taste these “flavors of place” and see if you can recognize the commonalities among
wines from the same village, just minutes down the road from another village and its
wines.




                     A wine shop and tasting room in the ancient walled city of Beaune.
    As for producers, remembering which producer is which in Burgundy can be daunting,
since many growers are siblings or cousins with the same last name. For example, in the
small, sleepy village of Chassagne-Montrachet alone, there are three producers with the
last name Morey (Domaine Bernard Morey, Domaine Jean-Marc Morey, and Domaine
Marc Morey), two producers with Ramonet in their name (Domaine Ramonet and
Domaine Bachelet-Ramonet), and four producers with the name Gagnard—and that’s just
in tiny Chassagne-Montrachet! It’s easy to see why taking exact notes on the name of a
Burgundy is essential if you ever want to find it again.




 At the celebrated bistro Ma Cuisine in Beaune, chef Fabienne Escoffier writes her daily menu on a blackboard. Roast
                                    pigeon and boeuf Bourguignon are specialties.

    As for vintages, Burgundy—more than most of the rest of the world—is a place where
the differences among vintages are clearly apparent. The region’s coolish, rain-prone
continental climate, the variations in sites and soils, and the exigencies of growing pinot
noir and chardonnay in such a place mean that harvest conditions and wines can vary
considerably. While all of this is true, it misses the most important truth of all: Most
vintages are neither great nor poor. They are someplace in between. It doesn’t make sense
to think about Burgundian vintages in such black-and-white terms when, in fact, that sort
of thinking has little basis in reality. Years ago, François Millet, the wine-maker at Comte
Georges de Vogüé, told me something I’ve never forgotten. Vintages, he said, are simply
the mood of the wine. Some years the wine is in an exuberant mood; some years it is shy.
And, of course, there are countless moods in between.
                      THE FOODS OF BURGUNDY

If any one dish epitomizes the intimate connection of wine and food in Burgundy, it is coq
au vin (hen or rooster cooked in Burgundy wine). Rustic, hearty, and slow cooked, it is
soulful, humble fare that speaks of the earth, not of artifice. Burgundian cooking may not
be cutting edge or elaborate, but it is honest and true to centuries of good home cooks who
knew how to take snails, rabbits, and guinea hens and make them irresistible.
   Burgundy’s most famous vineyards are bracketed by two of the legendary food capitals
of France—Dijon and Lyon. Dijon calls itself the mustard capital of the world, and
mustard, simple as it is, is France’s best-loved condiment. You can find a little pot on
every table of virtually every bistro in the country. About 70 percent of France’s mustard
is moutarde de Dijon, which refers to the style—a creamy, smooth, especially pungent
mustard—originally developed in Dijon. Today, many Burgundian villages have their own
moutarderie, or mustard shop, where artisanal mustards are made, sometimes with slightly
fermented white grape juice rather than vinegar.
   Although snails are cooked and eaten all over France, no snail preparation is better
known than escargots à la bourguignonne, snails cooked Burgundy style. Today, canned
and frozen snails from Turkey and Algeria show up in many restaurants worldwide, but in
Burgundy, wild snails can still be collected in the vineyards. Traditionally, these are
stuffed with garlic butter, cooked, and served piping hot.
   The beef dishes of Burgundy are also much acclaimed, especially the slowly braised
beef stew known as boeuf bourguignon. But the most exciting beef of all is Charolais,
named for the town of Charoles in southwestern Burgundy, and one of Europe’s finest
breeds. These massive cattle have meat that is tender and succulent, with an incomparable
full, rich flavor. A hunk of roasted Charolais and a glass of Pommard or Volnay is
Burgundy gift-wrapped. With Charolais cattle, meat is just the beginning, however. From
the Charolais’s milk come cylinders of rich Charolais cheese, which are also prized.
    But the most legendary Burgundian cheese of all must be the pungent, runny Époisses
de Bourgogne, named after the village Époisses. Sought after all over the world, Époisses
is aged slowly and given a daily washing with marc de Bourgogne, the local eau-de-vie.
                    A mural on a wall in the old city of Beaune depicts a young Dionysus.

    Finally, there’s pain d’épice, Burgundy’s spice bread. In Gallo-Roman times, Burgundy
was one of the corridors of the spice trade to the northern countries. Dijon’s love of
mustard resulted from this propitious positioning, and so did spice bread. The dense
loaves, made with honey, cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, coriander, aniseed, and orange peel,
are not exactly sweet; they’re more of a hearty snack. Who knows how many generations
of vignerons, come winter, have devoured an entire pain d’épice after a day spent pruning
in the damp, cold vineyards of Burgundy.

                         WHEN YOU VISIT… BURGUNDY
        BURGUNDY IS FILLED WITH QUIET, charming villages, many of which surround
        impressive medieval churches or cathedrals. There are scores of fabulous tiny
        restaurants specializing in the region’s humble, delicious cooking, and dozens of small,
        comfortable hotels.
        ALL OF THIS NOTWITHSTANDING, Burgundian domaines can be very difficult to visit,
        since they are so tiny and there is nothing that resembles a winery in the California
        sense. Small producers are simply not set up to receive visitors, and even if you call in
        advance and speak in French, your request may be refused. If luck is on your side
        however, you’ll end up going with the proprietor down into a cold, damp cellar, and
        tasting great Burgundies out of the barrel. No wine experience is more thrilling.
        TWO MAGNIFICENT, HISTORIC buildings are must-sees: the château of Clos de
        Vougeot, sitting like a jewel in the middle of a walled vineyard in the village of Vougeot,
        and in the city of Beaune, the impressive fifteenth-century Hôtel Dieu, with its colorful
        glazed tile roof and breathtaking grand hall. Each year, this is where the prestigious
        Hospices de Beaune wine auction is held.
                               The Burgundies to Know
When I approached the writing of this section, I had all the enthusiasm of a woman going to have a root canal.
Frankly, recommending Burgundies is fraught with problems, chief among them the knowledge that, thanks to their
infinitesimally small quantities in a global marketplace, great Burgundies are hard to get one’s hands on (which
doesn’t mean you shouldn’t try).
   Then there’s the worry over the wines themselves—the wines of Burgundy are fragile. Vintages, the age of the
wine, and how the wine was handled all dramatically leave their stamp. Despite these hesitations, the wines here
have all provided me with stellar experiences, and I’ve loved them to the very last drop. I offer them in the hope
that these bottles will also find their way to you, and that you’ll be equally pleased.

                                                   WHITES




                                 RENÉ ET VINCENT DAUVISSAT
                                    CHABLIS | VAILLONS | PREMIER CRU
                                                100% chardonnay
Shiveringly vibrant with acidity, René and Vincent Dauvissat’s Chablis always seems to personify the stark cold,
white landscape that is Burgundy’s most northern enclave. Chablis should never be unfocused, and this one, from
the Premier Cru vineyard known as Vaillons, certainly isn’t. Although this Chablis can have a honey-peach aroma
that sets you up for something mellow and lush, it’s almost savagely exact, pure, and cleansing. Vaillons is one of
the finest Premier Cru vineyards, and no one makes better wines from this small parcel than the Dauvissat family.

                                             DOMAINE LAROCHE
               CHABLIS | LES BLANCHOTS | GRAND CRU | RESERVE DE L’OBÉDIENCE
                                                100% chardonnay
Can Nature speak more vividly than this? Domaine Laroche’s Chablis from the Grand Cru vineyard Les Blanchots
is as pristine as a deep mountain lake, and the tension in the wine—the electricity between its acid and its fruit—is
haunting. I love this wine’s aroma, a smell that takes you back to ancient seabeds, ocean air, fresh brineyness.
Massively chalky on the palate at first, the wine turns ethereal, with notes of chamomile tea, lime, honey, and rocks.
I’ve always thought of this as the soprano of wines—high notes that linger and hold you, suspended in a state of
sensory purity. Domaine Laroche is one of the oldest domaines in Chablis and is built on an ancient cellar that dates
from the ninth century. The Reserve de l’Obédience is a special bottling of the Blanchots. L’obédience is an old
French term for a monastery.




                                             DOMAINE RAMONET

                    CHASSAGNE-MONTRACHET | LES RUCHOTTES | PREMIER CRU
                                                100% chardonnay
All-enveloping, rich and powerful, Ramonet’s wines make stunning statements. (A friend describes this wine as,
“like James Bond—elegant and a badass at the same time.”) What I’ve always loved about Ramonet’s Chassagne-
Montrachet is its midpalate density… a ticking atomic bomb of chalk, salt, and citrus that washes over the taster in
waves of minerality and fruit. And then lasts and lasts. Ramonet is a legendary estate in the Côte de Beaune. The
late Pierre Ramonet—known simply as the père (“father”)—was an eccentric peasant farmer who, at age seventy-
two, reportedly paid for a tiny sliver of the Le Montrachet vineyard by taking massive wads of French francs out of
his pockets and handing them to the lawyer conducting the transaction. The estate is now run by his grandsons Noël
and Jean-Claude.
                                                     LAFON

             DOMAINES DES COMTES | MEURSAULT | LES PERRIÈRES | PREMIER CRU
                                                100% chardonnay
Like spun filaments of gold, Lafon’s Meursault from the Les Perrières vineyard is a wine of great intricacy and
great opulence. The aromas, not of simple fruits, plunge you down into a deeper world of chalk beds, sassafras,
hazelnuts, caramel, and the flavor of honey as if all of the sweetness were removed from it and you were left with
the taste of gold and earth. Lafon is known for having an exquisite touch with Meursault, for capturing its
sensuality and elegance.




                                             DOMAINE LEFLAIVE

                                   BÂTARD-MONTRACHET | GRAND CRU
                                                100% chardonnay
Bâtard-Montrachet is never an understated wine. Year in and year out, this Grand Cru vineyard makes some of the
most dramatic, bold chardonnays in Burgundy, indeed in the whole world. The arc of flavor on the palate is mind-
blowing. The first sensation is one of massive richness, but then the wine seems to lift off in wave after wave of
chalky, minerally, honeyed flavors. Just when you think the wine can’t get any more intense, the subtle, exquisite
finish comes and saves you. Domaine Leflaive, headed by Anne-Claude Leflaive, practices biodynamic viticulture.
The domaine dates from from the sixteenth century, although many of the family’s vineyards were cultivated by
monks as far back as two thousand years ago.
                                           BONNEAU DU MARTRAY

                                  CORTON-CHARLEMAGNE | GRAND CRU
                                                100% chardonnay
Possibly the most sought-after white Burgundy of all, Corton-Charlemagne is the world’s greatest chardonnay, and
Bonneau du Martray is the largest owner of vines within the Grand Cru Corton-Charlemagne vineyard, which lies
partly in the village of Pernand-Vergelesses. The centuries-old vineyard is thought to have been owned in the late
700s by Charlemagne himself. With the vineyard’s perfect exposure and soil, Corton-Charlemagne is a wine that
ought to be mind-blowing, and it is. In the hands of the prestigious, small estate Bonneau du Martray (the only
estate in Burgundy to produce wines exclusively from Grand Cru vineyards), the wine is as exquisite, vibrant,
sensual, and long as Corton-Charlemagne can be. I love the way the wine lifts out of the glass and seems to levitate
on some higher plane of flavor. Chardonnay doesn’t get more poetic, more ethereal, than this.

                                                     REDS




                                          AURÉLIEN VERDET
                                 MOREY-ST.-DENIS | EN LA RUE DE VERGY
                                                 100% pinot noir
In the Côte de Nuits village of Morey-St.-Denis, right below the Grand Cru vineyard Clos de Tart, lies a lieu-dit
called En la Rue de Vergy, considered one of the best vineyards in Morey-St.-Denis. From a tiny 3.5-acre (1.4-
hectare) parcel within En la Rue de Vergey, Aurélien Verdet makes an ethereal pinot noir with a velvety, sappy
texture and exquisite balance. The wine is rich and alive with morello cherry and cinnamon notes, plus
undercurrents of something that exudes umami—black truffles maybe, or fine miso. Driven and enthusiastic,
Aurélien Verdet is one of Burgundy’s young (born in 1981) star vignerons and was a race car driver when his father
asked him to come back to the vineyards.
                                     DOMAINE DANIEL RION & FILS

                       CHAMBOLLE-MUSIGNY | LES CHARMES | PREMIER CRU
                                                100% pinot noir
Great Burgundy is often the equivalent of quiet but insistent music. Something about it pulls you back again and
again—as if the mystery of its taste could be solved with just one more sip. The Daniel Rion Chambolle-Musigny
from the Premier Cru vineyard Les Charmes can be like this. Seamless and supple, in great years it displays a
beautiful core of delicious things evocative of grenadine, cherry syrup, Asian spices, and earth. And all so
impeccably balanced, silky, and understated, it’s unnerving. In general, Chambolle-Musignys are more about grace
than power, as Rion’s Les Charmes charmingly shows. The Rion family, considered to be among Burgundy’s top-
ranking producers, is also known for their sumptuous Nuits-St.-Georges.




                                              DOMAINE DUJAC

                     CHAMBOLLE-MUSIGNY | LES GRUENCHERS | PREMIER CRU
                                                100% pinot noir
This domaine, begun in 1967 by the influential, highly praised winemaker Jacques Seysses, is now run by his two
sons, Alec and Jeremy, and Jeremy’s wife, Diana. The domaine’s wines are among the most sublime from
Burgundy. As a village, Chambolle-Musigny is known for the almost lacy elegance of its wines. Add to that a top
Premier Cru vineyard like Les Gruenchers (just down the slope from the Grand Cru Bonnes Mares) and an artist
family like the Seysses’, and you have magic. When I have tasted it, Les Gruenchers has been the epitome of
sensuality, with long, creamy mocha and earth flavors.
                                        COMTE GEORGES DE VOGÜÉ

                     CHAMBOLLE-MUSIGNY | LES AMOUREUSES | PREMIER CRU
                                                 100% pinot noir
The name of this vineyard—Les Amoureuses (women in love)—says it all, for the wine’s comingling of femininity
and sensuality is complex and beautiful. The rich flavors of raspberry and pomegranate are driven deep into the
wine and entwined there with a fresh, pure sense of minerality. Drinking this wine is, I must say, an ethereal
experience, as if every one of one’s senses has taken flight. The cellars of Comte Georges de Vogüé are
mesmerizing and hypnotic—a silent sanctuary for exquisite wines resting until they slowly unfurl themselves.
There is no doubt that these cellars are among the most spiritual places in all of Burgundy.




                                               DOMAINE LEROY

                                     CLOS DE LA ROCHE | GRAND CRU
                                                 100% pinot noir
In top vintages, this wine is incomparable and as close to sheer perfection as Burgundy gets. Its sappy cherry
quality—like fruits drenched in syrup—is pure hedonism. Its smell, like a damp forest—sweet, fresh, dying and yet
vividly alive—is sensual. Spices and minerals form a kind of intricate lacework within the wine. The texture is silk
against your cheek. All in all, the wine leaves you exhausted with pleasure. It is from the great Grand Cru vineyard
Clos de la Roche, in the village of Morey-St.-Denis. And the woman who makes it—Lalou Bize Leroy, the owner
of Domaine Leroy—is something of a legend in Burgundy, and one of its most flamboyant and influential
winemakers.
                                                CLOS DE TART

                                        CLOS DE TART | GRAND CRU
                                                 100% pinot noir
The monopole Clos de Tart, in Morey-St.-Denis, is a 17-acre (7-hectare) Grand Cru vineyard. The original estate,
founded by medieval nuns, once belonged to the Abbaye de Tart, itself part of the famous Abbaye de Cîteaux. The
wine is sumptuous, with a vivid, fresh richness evocative of pomegranates, cranberry compote, and raspberry jam,
plus whorls of spice and sassafras. Clos de Tart is known for its profound and incredible structure—qualities that
carry it for decades of aging. But I like it when it is young, when the pent-up power is palpable.
BEAUJOLAIS

The vineyards of Beaujolais extend for some 35 miles (56 kilometers) over low granite
hills to the south of Burgundy. For French administrative purposes, Beaujolais is
considered part of Burgundy, even though, aside from proximity, the two regions have
almost nothing in common. The climates are dissimilar; the soils and geology are
different; the grapes are not the same; the way the wines are made varies radically. Even
the spirit of each place is singular. Beaujolais is fruit and joy; Burgundy is earth and
solemnity.
   Beaujolais is both the name of the place and the wine made there. For several decades
now, the sad misconception about the wine Beaujolais has been that it’s a once-a-year
experience, drunk around the end of November when signs in restaurants and wine shops
from Paris to Tokyo trumpet Le Beaujolais Est Arrivé! (“The Beaujolais Has Arrived!”)
What has arrived, to be exact, is the PR exploit Beaujolais Nouveau, a grapey young red
wine made immediately after the harvest. Beaujolais Nouveau—with its bubble-gum-like
flavors—can be amusing (kids in France get to drink it), but as wines go, old-style,
traditional Beaujolais is infinitely better.
    Beaujolais has been called the only white wine that happens to be red. Indeed, despite
its vivid magenta color, Beaujolais can seem like white wine in its expressiveness,
freshness, and thirst-quenching qualities. The wine’s personality begins with the gamay
noir grape (usually known simply as gamay), virtually the only one used in Beaujolais’s
production. Gamay’s flavors are unmistakable: a rush of black cherry and black raspberry,
then a hint of peaches, violets, and roses, often followed by peppery spiciness at the end.
And because gamay is naturally low in tannin, its already profuse fruitiness seems even
more dramatic.
 With its rush of vivid cherry, raspberry, and peach flavors, good Beaujolais is irresistible and as exuberant-tasting as
                                                     childhood itself.


                             THE QUICK SIP ON BEAUJOLAIS
           TWO WORLDS OF BEAUJOLAIS exist—old-style Beaujolais wines made in a
           traditional manner, and contrived Beaujolais that are very commercial. The marketing
           phenomenon known as Beaujolais Nouveau belongs to the latter group.
           ALL BEAUJOLAIS is made from gamay, a deliciously, deeply fruity grape.
           MOST BEAUJOLAIS is made by a special fermentation technique—carbonic
           maceration—that maximizes the wine’s inherent fruitiness.

   Beaujolais’s character comes, however, not solely from gamay, but also from the
unusual, traditional manner in which many of the wines are made. Called carbonic
maceration, the process enhances fruity aromas and fruity flavors in wine. During this
process, entire clusters of grapes (usually hand-harvested so that the clusters are rot-free
and perfectly intact) are put whole into the fermenting tank. The grapes on the bottom,
crushed by the weight of the grapes on top, release their juice, which immediately starts
fermenting naturally due to wild yeasts on the grape skins, bathing the grapes on top in
carbon dioxide gas (a byproduct of fermentation). Those top-layer grapes eventually
explode from the pressure of the CO2, exposing them to yeasts in the tank and thus
causing them to ferment as well. Carbonic maceration could theoretically be used with any
grape, but it is particularly successful with ultrafruity grapes, such as gamay.
  After Beaujolais is fermented, it rests in tanks (a few growers also put it briefly in
small, relatively new oak) for several months or more before being sold.
       COMMERCIAL VS. OLD-STYLE BEAUJOLAIS

Several decades ago, all Beaujolais was what I’ll call old-style—meaning, made as a
serious wine. But fueled by the popularity of Beaujolais Nouveau in the 1960s and 1970s,
growers and producers began to increase their productions, making cheap, cheerful wines
that—in the beginning—were easy to sell and a cash-flow dream come true. As the hype
wore away, the practice turned in on itself and became a self-fulfilling prophecy. Growers,
paid increasingly little, were forced to take more and more shortcuts, increasing yields;
chaptalizing thin, unripe wines; filtering the wines severely; and releasing them early.
Beaujolais made in this large-scale, commercial way tasted more tutti-frutti than truly
fruity. Its bouncy, sophomoric flavor was often a dead ringer for Jell-O.
   Today, while commercial Beaujolais is widely available, so are wines from the serious,
old-style producers. Traditionally made Beaujolais from small estates often costs more,
but the pure deliciousness of the wines is incomparable. In many cases, they possess an
almost electric richness of fruit, floral, and spice notes that’s like drinking happiness.
Among the old-style producers to search out: Marcel Lapierre, Jean-Paul Thévenet, Jean-
Paul Brun, Guy Breton, Dominique Piron, Michel Tête, Jean Foillard, Domaine du Granit,
and Julien Sunier.
   In total, there are some three thousand growers and eighteen cooperatives in Beaujolais
today. Many growers sell to the region’s well-established négociants, including the largest
well known négociant, the firm Georges Duboeuf.
   Finally, like chardonnay, its sibling, gamay is the progeny of pinot noir and gouais
blanc. The grape originated in Burgundy in the fourteenth century, but was harshly (and
unfairly) judged by one of Burgundy’s powerful dukes (Philippe the Bold) who issued an
edict in 1395 banishing the grape from the Côte d’Or to the southern Burgundian region of
Beaujolais. His edict read, in part, “a very bad and disloyal variety called Gaamez (the old
name of gamay), from which come abundant quantities of wine… And this wine of
Gaamez is of such a kind that it is very harmful to human creatures, so much so that many
people who had it in the past were infested by serious diseases, as we’ve heard; because
said wine from said plant of said nature is full of significant and horrible bitterness. For
this reason we solemnly command you… all who have said vines of said Gaamez to cut
them down or have them cut down, wherever they may be in our country, within five
months.”
                          THE GRAPES OF BEAUJOLAIS
                                                RED
GAMAY: More correctly called gamay noir, gamay is effectively the sole grape of Beaujolais, where it
makes everything from utterly simple quaffs to more sophisticated fruity wines.
                   CATEGORIES OF BEAUJOLAIS

By law, Beaujolais is made in three ascending categories of quality (and price). They are:
BEAUJOLAIS
BEAUJOLAIS-VILLAGES
BEAUJOLAIS CRU

   Basic Beaujolais—about 50 percent of all the Beaujolais made—is the result of grapes
grown mainly in less distinguished (less granitic) vineyards in the south. Soil here is more
fertile, the land is flatter, and the wines tend to be lighter and less concentrated.
                                   THE BEAUJOLAIS CRUS
 From north to south, here are the ten villages—crus—that produce the most distinctive Beaujolais. The
 labels on bottles of Beaujolais Cru will usually name the producer and the cru only. The word Beaujolais
 will not appear.
 ST.-AMOUR: Rich, silky, and sometimes spicy wines; the aroma can suggest peaches. St.-Amour means
 “holy love.” One theory suggests the name is derived from a Roman soldier who, after escaping death,
 converted to Christianity and set up a mission. He was canonized as St. Amour.
 JULIÉNAS: Rich and relatively powerful, the aroma and flavor of Juliénas is floral and spicy. Named after
 Julius Caesar.
 CHÉNAS: A supple and graceful wine, with a subtle bouquet of wild roses. At just under 700 acres (280
 hectares), Chénas is the smallest Beaujolais cru.
 MOULIN-À-VENT: Hearty, rich, and well-balanced in texture, bouquet, and flavor. With Fleurie and
 Morgon, Moulin-à-Vent is one of the crus said to age the best. The name means “windmill,” in honor of a
 three-hundred-year-old stone one that rises above the vines.
 FLEURIE: Velvety in texture, with a bouquet both floral and fruity. Fleurie, situated on east-facing slopes
 that get gentle morning sun, is considered the most feminine of the Beaujolais crus.
 CHIROUBLES: Grapes for Chiroubles come from some of the vineyards located at the highest altitudes
 in Beaujolais. The wines are very low in tannin and light-bodied, often with a bouquet of violets.
 MORGON: With its soils rich in iron and manganese, Morgon has a personality that stands apart from all
 the other crus. Rich, masculine, and deep purple in color, it’s rather full in body for a Beaujolais. It tastes
 of apricots, peaches, and the earth.
 RÉGNIÉ: The newest cru, established in 1988, Régnié is relatively full-bodied and round, with red
 currant and raspberry flavors.
 BROUILLY: The wines of Brouilly are fruity with aromas of raspberries, cherries, blueberries, and
 currants. The pinkish-colored granite soils here yield light-bodied wines. At more than 3,000 acres (1,200
 hectares), this is the largest cru.
 CÔTE DE BROUILLY: Wines from the Côte de Brouilly are heady and lively, with a deep fruity quality.
 The more powerful expression of fruit is said to be the result of the Côte de Brouilly’s elevated location on
 the slopes of Mont Brouilly, an extinct volcano.

   Beaujolais-Villages—25 percent of production—is a notch better in quality, and comes
from thirty-nine villages in the hilly midsection of the region. Soil here is poorer,
composed of granite and sand, forcing the vines to yield better, riper grapes.
   Better still are the Beaujolais Crus—the final 25 percent of production. In Beaujolais
the word cru does not indicate a vineyard as it does in other French regions, but instead
refers to ten distinguished villages. Beaujolais Cru wines come from these villages, all of
which are located on steep granite hills (about 1,000 feet/305 meters in elevation) in the
northern part of Beaujolais. Cru wines are denser, richer, and more expressive than basic
Beaujolais. Not surprisingly, they are also capable of aging, thanks to their greater
structures.
Nicole Chanrion (left), shown with her sister Michèle, runs her family’s winery Domaine de la Voûte des Crozes in Côte-
 de-Brouilly. Chanrion does every task herself—from pruning the vines and driving the tractor to making the wine and
                                                       bottling it.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

The 42,000 acres (17,000 hectares) of Beaujolais vineyards carpet a corridor 35 miles (56
kilometers) long and about 9 miles (14 kilometers) wide. On the east is the Saône River
valley, on the west, the Monts de Beaujolais, a mountainous spur of the Massif Central.
The climate is continental, with cold winters and hot, mostly dry summers. The region is
divided in two. The northern (Haut) Beaujolais is where the highly desirable granite soils
are found. All ten of the Cru Beaujolais villages are located in the north. The southern
(Bas) Beaujolais is dominated by sedimentary rock and clay soils. Basic Beaujolais tends
to come from vineyards in the south.
                                BEAUJOLAIS NOUVEAU

Beaujolais Nouveau is regular Beaujolais, from the lesser districts, that is seven to nine
weeks old. Nearly a century ago, casks of the just-made, grapey wine would be shipped by
paddleboat down the Saône River to the bars and bistros of Lyon (and later, Paris). By the
1960s, the wine had become a successful PR campaign—a way of getting quick
recognition (and cash), all under the guise of celebrating the harvest. Nearly half a million
cases of Nouveau were being sold. Today, Beaujolais Nouveau still accounts for about half
of all basic Beaujolais made.




The church of Régnié la Durette amid the gamay vines of Régnié. The westernmost of the Beaujolais cru, Régnié became
                                               the tenth cru in 1988.


                               TO CHILL OR NOT TO CHILL?
     Chill it—but just a little. When Beaujolais is served just below room temperature, but not cold to the
     touch (fifteen minutes in the refrigerator will work), its flavors explode with fruit and spice. Chilling the
     wine is also customary in the region. Historically in Beaujolais, on summer Sundays, jugs of the wine
     would be set in buckets of cold water and placed under the shade of a tree in the center of the village so
     that men playing boules would have something to slake their thirst.

    In 1985, France’s Institut National des Appellations d’Origine (INAO) established the
third Thursday in November as the wine’s uniform release date. (Interestingly, in the rush
to release Nouveau on the official date, growers sometimes have to pick early, before the
grapes are ripe, thus undermining the quality of the wine.) While theoretically there is
better and worse Nouveau, in fact, much of the wine tastes merely like melted purple
Popsicles. Drinking it gives you the same kind of silly pleasure as eating cookie dough.
                WHEN YOU VISIT… BEAUJOLAIS
WINEMAKERS IN BEAUJOLAIS are warm and welcoming, and the region is
unpretentious and joyfully focused on eating and drinking. It’s been said that Beaujolais
flows in the veins of every cook here, and indeed the region is full of terrific country
restaurants specializing in home cooking. Lyon—considered the gastronomic capital of
France and the place where bistros first began—is less than 15 miles (24 kilometers)
from the southern part of Beaujolais and just north of where the Rhône Valley begins.
Many lovers of French cuisine consider a meal in Lyon worth the price of an
international plane ticket.
TWO OF THE CRUS especially worth visiting are Moulin-à-Vent with its famous
windmill (the unofficial symbol of Beaujolais) and Chiroubles. the highest in elevation,
so hikers take note, this is the hill to climb. At the top is the reward—a panoramic view
of the Haut Beaujolais and an excellent tasting cellar where you can taste an array of
local wines.
                               The Beaujolais to Know
The wines below are all what might be called “serious” Beaujolais—made by small-scale producers using artisanal
methods. (Nothing reminiscent of Popsicles and melted Jell-O here.) Beaujolais such as these are utterly delicious
fruit-driven, mineral-spiked wines waiting for food.




                                              DOMINIQUE PIRON

                                           MORGON | CÔTE DU PY
                                                   100% gamay
Dominique Piron’s Morgon makes me envision black raspberries nudged against chocolate cake. It’s joyful,
hedonistic wine to be sure. But the structure is also serious and impeccable, and the light waves of sandalwood-like
spice add an especially enticing note to the aroma. The Piron family has been growing grapes here since the
sixteenth century, making Dominique a fourteenth-generation winemaker. The Côte de Py is a small hill within
Morgon that produces especially concentrated flavors.




                                              MARCEL LAPIERRE

                                                    MORGON
                                                   100% gamay
Deliciously spicy, the Morgons of Marcel Lapierre are also very pure and racy. The gorgeous burst of gamay fruit in
the wines is counterbalanced by high notes of flowers and deep notes of minerals, creating a very complex sensory
experience. Marcel Lapierre became legendary for spearheading the Gang of Four, a group of four Beaujolais
winemakers who, starting in the 1970s, fought against the use of pesticides and argued for a return to the old days
of high-quality wine production.
                                                   JULIEN SUNIER

                                                        RÉGNIÉ
                                                      100% gamay
Julien Sunier is a small producer whose elegant Régniés have intense floral and spicy notes. One could, for all the
world, be standing in a sunny field of wildflowers on the hills of Beaujolais. The wines’ textures are so silky, the
fruit in the wine is so seductive, that it’s nearly impossible to stop drinking. The son of a hairdresser, Julien caught
the wine bug from his mother’s client Christophe Roumier (of Domaine Georges Roumier) and traveled the world
learning about wine before settling down on his tiny estate to make his magnetic wines.




                                                  JEAN-PAUL BRUN

                                 FLEURIE | DOMAINES DES TERRES DORÉES
                                                      100% gamay
Although granite soils do not yield granite-tasting wines (the mechanisms by which minerality in wine occur are
intricate and poorly understood), the stony flavors in this wine, coupled with the lively, fresh, palate-drenching
splashes of cherry fruit, are in a word, sensational. Lipsmacking yet sophisticated. My kind of wine.




                                                    MICHEL TÊTE

                                    JULIÉNAS | DOMAINE DU CLOS DU FIEF
                                                      100% gamay
Deliciousness hit dead-on. The mineral-strewn, rich cherry fruit in this wine seems so deeply embedded that the
wine just keeps evolving for hours after the bottle is opened. (If it lasts for hours, that is.) I love the synthesis of
flowers, minerals, and fruits; and the texture is utterly silky. Michel Tête, grandson of a barrel manufacturer who
started the estate, uses Burgundian techniques to create his concentrated wines.
                                   DOMAINE DE LA VOÛTE DES CROZES

                                              CÔTE DE BROUILLY
                                                   100% gamay
This wine changed the way I view Beaujolais. Its serious aromas of rocks, minerals, granite, and salt are anything
but frivolous. But then, a split second later, a firehose of gushing fruit (pomegranates, peaches, and raspberries)
comes at you. And in their wake, you feel as if the sky just rained down violets. In a way that is totally charming,
this irresistible Beaujolais has both impact and beauty. The domaine is owned and worked by Nicole Chanrion, one
of the few women winemakers in the region, who tends all 16 acres entirely by herself, from pruning the vineyards
and driving the tractors to making and bottling the wine.
THE RHÔNE

If I had to name France’s three greatest regions, I would say: Bordeaux (for the aristocracy
of the best wines made there); Burgundy (for what it teaches us about elegance in wine);
and the Rhône (for the uninhibited, fearless, almost savage flavors that the top wines
possess). There is no question that among the world’s greatest red wines, Rhônes are the
most untamed. Their howlingly spicy, dark flavors can seem almost caged, ready to
explode with fierceness. Rhônes are the wine equivalent of a primal scream.
   The Rhône Valley takes its name from the Rhône River, which begins high in the Swiss
Alps and flows into France through the canyons of the Jura Mountains. South of Lyon and
just north of Ampuis, where the vineyards begin, the river makes a sharp turn and plunges
southward for 250 miles (400 kilometers) until it washes into the Mediterranean, just west
of Marseille.
   The valley is divided into two parts: the northern Rhône, smaller and a bit more
prestigious, and the southern Rhône, larger and better known. It takes about an hour to
drive between the two, and along the way, you see only patches of isolated vineyards. In
fact, the northern and southern Rhône are so distinct and different that, were it not for the
river that connects them, they would almost certainly be considered separate wine regions.
   In both the north and the south there are multiple wine districts, or appellations. The
most renowned northern reds are Côte-Rôtie and Hermitage; the most famous southern red
is Châteauneuf-du-Pape. The popular, well-priced wines known as Côtes-du-Rhône—
staples in French cafés and many others worldwide—can come from either part of the
valley, although most come from tracts of vineyards in the south.

                        THE QUICK SIP ON THE RHÔNE
         THE RHÔNE VALLEY in southeastern France is divided into two parts: the northern
         Rhône and the southern Rhône. Wines from each are distinctly different.
         RED WINES DOMINATE THE REGION, although whites and rosés are also made in
         the Rhône. The most famous northern Rhône reds are Côte-Rôtie and Hermitage; the
         most famous southern red is Châteauneuf-du-Pape.
         SYRAH IS THE SOLE RED GRAPE in the north. Southern Rhône reds are usually
         blends of many grapes, the most important of which are grenache and mourvèdre.

   Although twenty-seven varieties of grapes are grown in the Rhône Valley, only a
handful of these are of major importance. The others—many of them grapes that have
grown in the Rhône for centuries and are simply inter-planted with the main varieties—are
today used almost nostalgically, to add nuance and what winemakers sometimes call the
flavors of tradition. As a matter of law, each appellation specifies which of the twenty-
seven grapes can be used within its borders (see The Major Appellations, Wines, and
Principal Grapes of the Northern Rhône, page 241, and The Major Appellations, Wines,
and Principal Grapes of the Southern Rhône, page 249). Winemakers are then free to
create their “personal recipe” blend from the permissible varieties.
   The grapes of the northern Rhône are the easiest to remember. All red wines come from
only one red grape—syrah. All white wines in the north are made from either viognier or a
blend of marsanne and roussanne.
   The southern Rhône is just the opposite. In such appellations as Châteauneuf-du-Pape,
Gigondas, and Vacqueyras, a small chorus of red and white grapes come out to sing,
including grenache and syrah, as well as mourvèdre. As we’ll see, there is a good reason
northern Rhône reds are the expression of one grape and southern Rhônes the expression
of many.
   The Rhône Valley is one of the oldest wine regions in France. When the Romans
arrived some two thousand years ago, the inhabitants of what was then Gaul were drinking
wines that the Roman writer Pliny described as excellent. Indeed, wine had been
introduced to southern France well before—sometime around 500 B.C.—by the Etruscans
(a pre-Roman Italian tribe), and the French had quickly learned the art of winemaking
themselves.
   All of this said, Rhône wines are not a singular idea. Among the top wines, the large
number of small growers here, plus the huge differences in the terroirs, plus the wide
range of grape varieties, all add up to a mountain of highly individual, exciting wines.
                            THE NORTHERN RHÔNE

The northern Rhône is where many of the Rhône Valley’s rarest and most expensive reds
and whites are made. The region begins with Côte-Rôtie, the northernmost appellation,
and extends about 50 miles (80 kilometers) south, as far as Cornas and the small,
inconsequential St.-Péray. In between are the five appellations: Condrieu, Château-Grillet,
St.-Joseph, Hermitage, and Crozes-Hermitage.
   The best vineyards cling to narrow, rocky terraces on the steep slopes that loom over
the river. The ancient, shallow granite and slate soil there is poor. Erosion is such a threat
that, were it not for the terraces and the hand-built stone walls that wearily hold them in
place, the vines would slide down the hillsides. Even so, some of this weathered, crumbly
soil usually does wash down the slopes in the winter rain, and when it does, Rhône
winemakers do what they’ve always done: haul the precious stuff back up in small
buckets.




             Harvesting marsanne grapes in the steep vineyards of Hermitage above the city of Tain.

   The climate in the northern Rhône is continental, entirely unlike the climate in the
south, which is Mediterranean. In the north, the winters are hard, cold, and wet; the
summers are hot. Late spring and early fall fog make the southern orientation of the
vineyards critical. Without this good southern exposure, the grapes would not receive
enough sunlight and heat to ripen properly. It helps that the well-drained, fractured granite
soils retain heat, for the howling, icy northern wind, known as Le Mistral (in the Occitan
dialect of southern France, the word means master), can quickly cool the vines.
   The only red grape permitted in the northern Rhône is syrah, a natural cross of the
white grape mondeuse blanche and the red grape dureza (which itself is a descendent of
pinot noir). The cross is thought to have occurred in the Rhône-Alps region of eastern
France.
   Divine enological wisdom must have been operating when the northern Rhône settled
on syrah, for syrah planted there makes what are unquestionably some of the world’s most
intense wines. Darkly savage and dramatic, they exude corruption, and almost pant with
gamy, meaty, animal flavors. (Then there’s blood and offal. You can count on Rhône
syrahs taking you down into realms of flavor that can’t be talked about in polite company.)
Plus the flavor that tips you off that you’re in the northern Rhône—white pepper, which is
evident in virtually every wine here. But pepper is just the beginning. From there, the
wines explode with aromas of exotic smoky incense, forest, and leather, while the flavors
of black plums, blackberries, and blueberries pile on. The fervor of these flavors is due in
part to the age of the vines. Many are at least forty years old, and some broach a hundred.
These centurians don’t produce many bunches of grapes, but the grapes they do produce
are packed with power and concentration.
    As for white wine, only a small amount is made here. Condrieu and Château-Grillet are
the most renowned and expensive northern whites. Both are made exclusively from the
perfumed, lush white grape viognier (also indigenous to the Rhône and also the progeny of
mondeuse blanche). All other northern Rhône whites—Hermitage Blanc, Crozes-
Hermitage Blanc, St.-Joseph Blanc, and so on—are made from two other white grapes:
marsanne, the heartbeat of the blend, and roussanne, added for its finesse and exotic
aromas and flavors of quince, peaches, and lime blossoms. And finally, no rosés are made
in the northern Rhône, although as we’ll see, the southern Rhône is well known for them.
                            THE GRAPES OF THE RHÔNE
                                              WHITES
 BOURBOULENC: A component in southern Rhône blends, especially in white Côtes-du-Rhône, where it
 adds acidity.
 CLAIRETTE: Fresh and beautifully aromatic when grown at low yields, clairette plays a leading role in
 virtually all of the white Côtes-du-Rhône.
 GRENACHE BLANC: The white mutation of grenache and the workhorse white grape of the southern
 Rhône. Has high alcohol and low acidity.
 MACCABEO, PICARDAN, PICPOUL, AND ROLLE (AKA VERMENTINO): Blending grapes of modest
 quality that are used in southern Rhône blends.
 MARSANNE: Important white grape of the northern Rhône. Makes up the majority percentage in
 Hermitage Blanc, Crozes-Hermitage Blanc, and St.-Joseph Blanc. Also used widely in the south. Usually
 blended with other white grapes.
 MUSCAT BLANC À PETITS GRAINS: The deeply aromatic grape that makes the Rhône’s famous
 fortified dessert wine, Muscat de Beaumes-de-Venise. Considered one of the best grapes among the
 varieties with muscat in the name.
 ROUSSANNE: Elegant, aromatic white of the northern Rhône. Often added to marsanne for finesse.
 Difficult and hence expensive to grow.
 UGNI BLANC: French name for the grape trebbiano Toscano, a prolific white grape grown all over
 southern and central France. Used as filler in inexpensive southern blends.
 VIOGNIER: The most perfumed white of the Rhône. Grown in small quantities in the north, where it
 becomes Condrieu and Château-Grillet. Small amounts of viognier are also grown in the southern
 Rhône, where it makes its way into some of the top Côtes-du-Rhône.

                                                REDS
 CALITOR: Relatively neutral red used in blends but declining in importance.
 CARIGNAN: Used mostly in the south in Côtes-du-Rhône and rosé wines.
 CINSAUT: Blending grape in southern Rhônes. Adds finesse and cherry nuances and can make
 especially lovely rosés.
 CLAIRETTE ROSE, COUNOISE, MARSELAN, MUSCARDIN, MUSCAT NOIR, PICPOUL NOIR,
 TERRET NOIR, AND VACCARÈSE: Minor blending grapes used in many southern Rhônes for aromatic
 and flavor nuances.
 GRENACHE: Leading grape of the southern Rhône. Makes up the dominant percentage of virtually all
 red blends. Has elegant cherry and raspberry confiture flavors. (A mutation known as grenache gris [gray
 grenache] is not as high in quality.)
 MOURVÈDRE: Major blending grape in southern Rhônes. Gives structure, acidity, and leather and game
 flavors. It also originated in Spain, where it is called monastrell, or sometimes mataro.
 SYRAH: Star grape of the northern Rhône, where it is used alone to make bold, spicy, peppery wines. In
 the south, it is an important part of such blends as Châteauneuf-du-Pape, Gigondas, and Côtes-du-
 Rhône.

   Northern Rhône wines are made by tiny, family-owned estates; by larger, well-known,
family-owned firms such as M. Chapoutier and E. Guigal; by négociants who buy wine,
blend it, and then bottle it under their own brand label; and by a few cooperatives (which
make the least interesting wines). The small producers are very small. In Côte-Rôtie, for
example, there are only sixty vineyards, but more than a hundred producers who make
wine from those vineyards.
   As they are most everywhere else, winemaking styles in the northern Rhône are
moving in a modern direction. Yet certain traditional methods live on. Key among these is
the old custom of including the stems along with the grapes during fermentation. Stems
profoundly affect a wine, imbuing its aroma and flavor with notes of sandalwood, spice,
and a briary character. In addition, since stems as well as grape skins contain tannin, not
removing the stems increases the tannin and gives the wines more edge, more grip.
   Because the production of most northern Rhônes is limited, and because many
vineyards are extremely difficult to work, the wines—especially the top Côte-Rôties and
Hermitages—are expensive.

CÔTE-RÔTIE
Some of the most thrilling wines of the Rhône carry the appellation Côte-Rôtie (literally,
“roasted hillside”). They are dramatic wines with incisive, earthy, and gamy flavors.
Pepper seems to pace back and forth in the glass like a caged animal. All Côte-Rôties are
red and based on syrah. No white wine is made in this appellation.
   There are slightly less than 600 acres (240 hectares) of Côte-Rôtie vineyards, the best
of which are on precipitous granite slopes with grades of up to 60 degrees, facing due
south. There are other Côte-Rôtie vineyards on the plateaus above the slopes (the ironic
“non-côtes” Côtes). These newer vineyards were permitted to be established when the
original appellation was slightly expanded several times in the 1970s and 1980s. In
acknowledgment of the inferiority of certain plateau vineyards, some producers willingly
declassify the wines made from those vineyards, labeling them Côtes-du-Rhône, rather
than the more prestigious Côte-Rôtie.
   Wherever they are found, steep vineyards that happen to fall in direct sun are coveted,
for the grapes are drenched in light (for ripeness) but cooled by the altitude and breezes
(preserving acidity and finesse). Syrah, in particular, needs this yin and yang of warmth
and coolness. When it is grown in the hotter, southern Rhône, syrah can be fatter on the
palate, but it loses the savage precision and striking ferocity of a great Côte-Rôtie.
   Within the Côte-Rôtie are two famous slopes: the Côte Brune and the Côte Blonde.
According to a predictable legend, these were named after the daughters—one brunette,
one blonde—of an aristocratic feudal lord. The wines are just what the stereotypes
suggest. Côte Brunes are generally more tannic and powerful; Côte Blondes, more elegant
and racy. If a Côte-Rôtie comes from one of these slopes, or is a blend of the two, the label
will say so.
   Producers in Côte-Rôtie, and in the Rhône in general, commonly blend grapes from
different vineyard sites to achieve complexity. Occasionally, if the vineyard is
extraordinary, grapes from it may be vinified separately and made into a wine labeled with
the name of the vineyard. Such wines are expensive and ravishing. Among the top
vineyards are La Mouline, La Landonne, La Chatillone, La Garde, La Chevalière, and La
Turque.
    Côte-Rôtie is one of only two top French red wines that, by law, may be made with a
small quantity of white grapes blended in (the other being Hermitage). The reason for this
is largely practical, since in Côte-Rôtie viognier vines are scattered in among the syrah
vines in many vineyards. Historically, viognier’s creamy texture (the result of its high
glycerine and low acid levels) was thought to soften the sometimes blunt edges of syrah.
Today viognier is included for its exotic aroma as well, making Côte-Rôtie more
fascinating. Although up to 20 percent viognier can, by law, be included in red Côte-Rôtie,
most producers include less than 5 percent.

                  THE MOST IMPORTANT RHÔNE WINES
                          LEADING APPELLATIONS—NORTH
         CHÂTEAU-GRILLET white
         CONDRIEU white
         CORNAS red
         CÔTE-RÔTIE red
         CROZES-HERMITAGE red and white
         HERMITAGE red and white
         ST.-JOSEPH red and white

                              LEADING APPELLATIONS—SOUTH

         CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE red and white
         CÔTES-DU-RHÔNE red and white
         CÔTES-DU-RHÔNE-VILLAGES red and white
         GIGONDAS red and rosé
         MUSCAT DE BEAUMES-DE-VENISE white (fortified; sweet)
         VACQUEYRAS red


                      APPELLATIONS OF NOTE—SOUTH
         RASTEAU red
         TAVEL rosé
   The tiny appellation of Côte-Rôtie (literally, “Roasted Slope”) makes some of the most treasured and hauntingly
                                              delicious wines of the Rhône.

   The four fairly large, well-known firms in Côte-Rôtie are Guigal, M. Chapoutier, Paul
Jaboulet Aîné, and Delas Frères (today owned by the Champagne house of Louis
Roederer). In the 1970s, Guigal was one of the first Rhône wineries to age wines partially
in new French oak. In the 1990s, Chapoutier wines, in particular, soared in quality as the
family firm was taken over by the ambitious son, Michel Chapoutier. In addition to the
four impressive firms above, some of the most exciting Côte-Rôties are made by tiny
producers, including René Rostaing, Robert Jasmin, Henri Gallet, Jamet, Michel Ogier, J.
M. Gerin, Benjamin et David Duclaux, and Château de St. Cosme.

CONDRIEU AND CHÂTEAU-GRILLET
Condrieu and Château-Grillet are the northern Rhône’s most famous white wines
appellations. One is tiny; the other, microscopic. Château-Grillet, of course, sounds as
though it is one producer, not an appellation. It is both. Within the appellation Château-
Grillet there is but one producer: Château-Grillet. At 8.6 acres (3.5 hectares), it is one of
the smallest appellations in France and sits like an enclave within Condrieu. Today it is
owned by the Artemis Group, the parent company of Bordeaux’s Château Latour.
        THE MAJOR APPELLATIONS, WINES, AND PRINCIPAL
              GRAPES OF THE NORTHERN RHÔNE
 The appellations are listed following the Rhône River north to south. All of the red wines of the northern
 Rhône are made from one red grape exclusively—syrah. While the region is primarily devoted to red
 wine, the two small appellations Condrieu and Château-Grillet are both devoted entirely to white wines
 made from viognier. (No rosés are made in the northern Rhône.)

                                                        PRINCIPAL RED              PRINCIPAL WHITE
   APPELLATION               WINES(S) MADE
                                                        GRAPE                      GRAPE

   CÔTE-RÔTIE                red                        syrah                      none

   CONDRIEU                  white                      none                       viognier

   CHÂTEAU-GRILLET           white                      none                       viognier

   ST.-JOSEPH                red and white              syrah                      roussanne, marsanne

   HERMITAGE                 red and white              syrah                      roussanne, marsanne

   CROZES-HERMITAGE          red and white              syrah                      roussanne, marsanne

   CORNAS                    red                        syrah                      none


   Both Condrieu and Château-Grillet are made from viognier, an exotically aromatic
variety that, to its admirers, is one of the most drippingly sensual white grapes in the
world. In great years, and when it’s perfectly made, viognier explodes with the heady
aromas of honeysuckle, peaches, white melons, lychees, fresh orange peel, and gardenias.
The wine’s texture is as soothing as fresh whipped cream. But, the grape is notoriously
fickle, sensitive to its site, low in acidity, and difficult to grow. If the producer isn’t
careful, the wine can seem like cheap perfume.
   There is very little viognier in France. In addition to the 270 or so acres (100 hectares)
in Condrieu and the 8.6 acres (3.5 hectares) in Château-Grillet, there are smatterings in
other parts of the Rhône, as well as a small amount in the Languedoc-Roussillon. Outside
of France, California is the leading producer—growing ten times more viognier than is
grown in the Rhone.

      The village of Condrieu sits at a curve in the Rhône River. The name comes
      from the French coin de ruisseau, “corner of the brook.”
 At the summit of the Hermitage hill is La Chapelle—a small stone chapel built as a sanctuary in 1235 by the knight
 Gaspard de Stérimberg. Today, La Chapelle and the renowned vineyards surrounding it are owned by Paul Jaboulet
                                                       Aîné.

   The most well-known, top producer of Condrieu is Georges Vernay. Look also for
excellent Condrieu from E. Guigal, René Rostaing, André Perret, Dumazet, Yves
Cuilleron, Philippe Faury, and Robert Niero.

ST.-JOSEPH
When it was first established in 1956, St.-Joseph was a small, hilly appellation directly
across the river from Hermitage. The red wines in particular had a very good reputation.
Today, while some St.-Josephs are dynamite, many others lack stuffing, seeming coarse
and thin. One reason for this is the appellation’s expansion. St.-Joseph has grown into a
long, 2,500-acre (1,000-hectare) corridor stretching from Condrieu to the bottom tip of the
northern Rhône. Vineyards are now planted where the exposure to the sun is less ideal.
   Today as in the past, most St.-Joseph wines are red and based on syrah, with up to 10
percent of the white grapes marsanne and roussanne blended in. About 10 percent of the
production of the appellation is white; St.-Joseph Blanc logically is made from marsanne,
with touches of roussanne. One of the best, Roger Blachon’s, has, in great years, the
ethereal texture of the finest honey.
  Among the top producers of white and red St.-Joseph are M. Chapoutier, Jean-Louis
Chave, Yves Cuilleron, Jean-Louis Grippat, Alain Graillot, and André Perret.

HERMITAGE
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Hermitage was France’s costliest red wine. Not
only was it more expensive than the best Bordeaux, but the best Bordeaux (including the
First Growths) were often—if secretly—“hermitaged,” meaning that Hermitage was
secretly blended in to give the Bordeaux extra depth, color, and richness.
   The appellation Hermitage is a single 1,000-foot-high (300-meter) hill, with just 300
acres (120 hectares) of vineyards clinging to its mostly southern-facing slope. The whole
of Hermitage is smaller than some wine properties in California. The famous soils here are
mostly granite, interspersed with gravel, flint, and limestone.

                                          BISTRO LESSONS
    The vineyards of the Rhône Valley lie just south of the city Lyon, known as the gastronomic capital of
    France (north of Lyon, the vineyards of Beaujolais begin). In a country that takes its belly seriously, this
    unofficial title is no small feat, and Lyon lives up to the challenge with 1,500 restaurants (one restaurant
    for every 333 residents!). It’s no surprise that France’s first bistros—and their simpler predecessors,
    known as bouchons—originated here as family-owned taverns where working men could eat and drink
    cheaply but well. Even today, a no-frills, roll-up-your-sleeves approach to food remains the city’s
    signature. And no one gets too uppity about wine either—carafes of Côtes-du-Rhône and Beaujolais are
    never more than an arm’s length away. And what better way to wash down poached pork offal sausages
    (andouillettes), cold chicken liver salad, cheesy potato gratin, curly endive with chunks of salty bacon, or
    a wine-soaked chicken fricassee?

   Predictably, there are many legends concerning hermits who supposedly gave
Hermitage its name. The one most often told concerns a medieval crusader, Gaspard de
Stérimberg, who, after being wounded in war, was granted, by Queen Blanche de Castille,
the right to establish a sanctuary on top of the hill. A small, ancient stone chapel still
marks the spot. It is for this chapel that La Chapelle, the impressive top wine of Paul
Jaboulet Aîné, is named.
   Along with Côte-Rôtie, red Hermitage is the most revered wine of the northern Rhône.
In great years, Hermitage is a leathery, meaty red, packed with blackberry and black
cherry fruits and smoky, damp earth flavors. The famous English scholar and wine writer
George Saintsbury once described Hermitage as “the manliest wine” he’d ever drunk.
   As in Côte-Rôtie, the only red grape in Hermitage is syrah. It is generally vinified in a
traditional manner and aged either in large casks for up to three years or in small oak
barrels, some percentage of which are new. Up to 15 percent white grapes (marsanne
and/or roussanne) are allowed in red Hermitage, but few producers add them.
   The rare white wine Hermitage Blanc, made from marsanne and roussanne, tends to be
a full-throttle, full-bodied, bold-tasting, rich, almost masculine white wine, sometimes
with a fascinating oily, resiny texture. In the best wines, the roussanne lifts the wine and
adds hints of peaches, quince, almonds, honeysuckle, and lime. The two best examples of
Hermitage Blanc are Jean-Louis Chave’s Hermitage Blanc and M. Chapoutier’s Ermitage
l’Ermite Blanc. Both are massive wines with swaths of flavor so bold they seem like
brushstrokes on an Impressionist painting.
  The top Hermitage producers, some of whom make both red and white wine, include E.
Guigal, Jean-Louis Chave, Marc Sorrel, M. Chapoutier, and Paul Jaboulet Aîné.

CROZES-HERMITAGE
Following Hermitage tradition, Crozes-Hermitage makes red wines from syrah, as well as
a tiny amount of white wine from marsanne and a bit of roussanne. The Crozes-Hermitage
vineyards, however, are mostly on the flatlands that spread out south and east of the hill of
Hermitage. The area they cover is ten times larger than Hermitage; indeed Crozes-
Hermitage is the largest appellation in the northern Rhone.
    Because Crozes-Hermitage comes from less distinguished, higher-yielding vineyards, it
is usually less concentrated than either Côte-Rôtie or Hermitage. That said, there are a few
top-notch producers of Crozes-Hermitage, notably Alain Graillot, whose wine—vibrant,
complex, severe, and peppery—is easily the equal of many Hermitages, at less than half
the price. Other top producers to know are Albert Belle, M. Chapoutier, and Domaine
Combier.




The Rhône Valley takes many of its culinary cues from the city just north of it—Lyon (known as the gastronomic capital
            of France). The restaurant Le Petit Glouton specializes in crepes and traditional bistro fare.


CORNAS
Cornas, from the old Celtic word for burnt or scorched earth, is a tiny region that sits at
the southern end of the northern Rhône. Only red wines are made here, all of them
exclusively from syrah. At their best, Cornas are dense, edgy, masculine wines with a
phalanx of white pepper that hits you in the teeth. A split second later, a briary character
explodes on your palate, and, if the Cornas is especially untamed, that may be followed by
what can only be described as the sense that your tongue is being lashed by strips of black
leather. Cornas is not everyone’s cup of tea, but those of us who love it, love it madly.
Aging is a critical factor. In the Rhône Valley, Cornas is generally drunk after it has been
aged for seven to ten years and has taken on a fine leatheriness and earthiness.
    As in Côte-Rôtie and Hermitage, Cornas’s best vineyards are on dangerously steep
hillsides precariously held in place by ancient terraces with stone walls. The vineyards,
interspersed with patches of oak and juniper forest, face due south. The hills above block
cool winds from the north. Both the light and the heat of the sun are intense. It’s a perfect
equation for powerful wine. Top Cornas producers include Auguste Clape, Jean-Luc
Colombo, Thierry Allemand, and Franck Balthazar.

                       WHEN YOU VISIT… CHAMPAGNE
        CHAMPAGNE IS A SOLEMN, spiritual place—a place of great religious and historic
        significance. It has none of the carefree abandon of, say, Tuscany; none of the sunny
        energy of the Napa Valley. Indeed, for all its joyfulness as a wine, the region itself has
        been continually torn apart by tragedy, especially during World Wars I and II, when it
        was a gruesome battlefield. As a result, there’s a soulfulness here that’s as palpable as
        the dazzling bubbles in every glass you’ll have.
        OF CHAMPAGNE’S TWO MOST IMPORTANT cities, the larger one, Reims, boasts
        many of the great houses, including Ruinart, Veuve Clicquot, and Taittinger, plus the
        majestic underground cellars called crayères. Reims is also the home of one of the
        most breathtaking cathedrals of the world—the Cathedral of Reims, site of the
        coronations of French kings. Don’t miss Maison Fossier (fossier.fr) in the center of the
        city. Founded in 1756, this jewel of a shop (decorated entirely in pink) is famous for
        Biscuits Roses de Reims, tiny, crunchy, pink-colored biscuits that are traditionally eaten
        by first dipping them in Champagne.
        THE SMALLER TOWN OF EPERNAY is considered the unofficial capital of
        Champagne. Here, along the Rue de Champagne, are the side-by-side gleaming
        mansions and cellars of Perrier-Jouët, Moët & Chandon, and Pol Roger. Just outside
        the town is the Abbey of Hautvillers, where Dom Pérignon lived and worked.
        AS IS TRUE IN BORDEAUX, Champagne is a fairly formal region, and it’s mandatory
        to have an appointment to visit the Champagne houses. (This is not the time to be
        wearing running shoes, unless you want to feel vastly underdressed.)
                 The Northern Rhône Wines to Know
Be prepared. The wines below are a collective primal scream. Northern Rhône wines are tempests of wild flavor…
and for those of us who love them, the wilder, the better. In particular, the daringly intense syrahs here have no
equivalent elsewhere in the wine world. Falling in love with them isn’t easy at first, but it is a right of passage.

                                                   WHITES




                                             M. CHAPOUTIER
                                             ERMITAGE | L’ERMITE
                                                 100% marsanne
This is my vote for the most massive white wine of France. So strong and “present,” its impact (though not its
flavor) is like Cognac—a full-throttle experience to be sure. Great Hermitage whites, such as L’Ermite (spelled
without the H, the way it was before the nineteenth century, when the British, who had a monopoly on distribution,
added the H), are hard to describe. They are relatively low in acid, not fruity, not spicy, and not sweet, although,
like this one, they often taste a bit like honey or caramel, absent the sugar. Bold and broad on the palate, L’Ermite
can only be described as commanding, with a gravitas that rivals the most intense red. The Chapoutier family also
makes wines in the southern Rhône, and their Châteauneuf-du-Pape, called Barbe Rac, is sensational.
                                                YVES CUILLERON

                                          CONDRIEU | LES CHAILLETS
                                                    100% viognier
Yves Cuilleron is one of the Rhône’s shining lights. His exquisite Condrieu fills your mouth as opulently as a
spoonful of whipped cream. The incredible honeysuckle and soft vanilla flavors are utterly refined, yet rich. More
than many other producers, Cuilleron has enormous talent when it comes to weaving lushness together with
elegance.

                                                       REDS




                                             ALAIN GRAILLOT
                                     CROZES-HERMITAGE | LA GUIRAUDE
                                                     100% syrah
Graillot makes one of the few great Crozes-Hermitages, a wine many believe is the equal of Hermitage—at less
than half the cost. This is a dark, brooding, edgy, Clint Eastwood of a wine, with flavors that wrestle each other in
the glass. Spices, pepper, earth, blackberries, and violets all collide in a delicious explosion. La Guiraude, a special
selection of the best lots of wine, is made only in very good years. Not to worry. Graillot’s regular Crozes-
Hermitage is also pretty wonderful.
                                          DOMAINE JEAN-LOUIS CHAVE

                                                      HERMITAGE
                                                       100% syrah
Hermitage has been called the manliest of wines, and this one has the sort of sensual darkness that fits the bill
precisely. At first, the huge, mesmerizing aromas and flavors suggest smoking meat, leather, sweat, and damp earth.
But Chave’s wines are so complex, they can pour forth new flavors by the minute. The Chave family has been
making Hermitage since the fifteenth century, and over those centuries very little about the winemaking has
changed.




                                                       E. GUIGAL

                                             CÔTE-RÔTIE | LA MOULINE
                                    Almost entirely syrah, with a trace of viognier
Guigal is one of the most outstanding producers in the Rhône, year in and year out making textbook Rhônes,
sensuous wines of profound depth and concentration. When I was just beginning my wine career, it was a Guigal
Côte-Rôtie, Brune et Blonde, (a blend of grapes from two vineyards evocatively named the brunette and the
blonde), that convinced me that nothing on earth was quite as mesmerizing, as intellectually riveting as a great
wine. I still love Brune et Blonde, but if one of Guigal’s stars shines just a little bit brighter than all the others, it is
its Côte-Rôtie known as La Mouline, one of three esteemed single-vineyard wines in the Guigal portfolio (the other
two are La Turque and La Landonne, leading collectors to give them the nickname “the La La’s”). Sweetly rich and
ripe, a great La Mouline is fat with velvety-textured boysenberry/cassis fruit interwoven with violets and exotic
spices, and buttressed against a dramatic, almost primal gaminess. The heady aroma alone is enough to stop you in
your tracks.
                                            JEAN-LUC COLOMBO

                                           CORNAS | LES RUCHETS
                                                   100% syrah
Here it is—quintessential Cornas: brooding, black, massive, earthy, leathery, and yet somehow voluptuous at the
same time. Jean-Luc Colombo, restless, driven, and impatient, turns out some of the most sensational Cornas today.
In Colombo’s hands, Les Ruchets (the beehives) sacrifices none of its power, but there’s an elegance, a sweet
ripeness here, too, that’s seductive. Colombo’s mother was a chef, and he makes all of his wines, he says, with food
in mind. So what did he have in mind with this? Wild hare.




                                            PAUL JABOULET AÎNÉ

                                         HERMITAGE | LA CHAPELLE
                                                   100% syrah
Named for the thirteenth-century chapel on the top of the Hermitage hill, this is a legendary wine, and a wine every
syrah lover should have at least once. As with all great wines, you can lose yourself in it. The animal fur and
campfire aromas have savage appeal, and the texture—like black licorice melting on your palate—is hedonistic to
be sure. Despite its suppleness and grace, La Chapelle has enormous structure and is one of the most age-worthy of
all Rhônes.
                                                 RENE ROSTAING

                                                    CÔTE-RÔTIE
                                                     100% syrah
 The flavors in Rostaing’s Côte-Rôties usually begin quietly, like a whisper, then crash in wave after wave of
 delicious intensity. Taste buds need seat belts for this wine. All of the quintessential northern Rhône flavors and
 aromas are here: white pepper and exotic spices, incense, roasted meat, gaminess, plowed earth, blueberries, and
 blackberries. Rostaing, a small producer, is known for wines full of energy and personality.




The forbidding, impossible-to-farm vineyards of the southern Rhône Valley defy belief. Pieces of rock sheared off Alpine
 glaciers tumbled and rolled as they were carried down the Rhône River, ultimately becoming the rounded “galets” in
                               which the vineyards of Châteauneuf-du-Pape are planted.
                        THE SOUTHERN RHÔNE

No one can resist the charm of southern France—especially the magical place known as
Châteauneuf-du-Pape (“new castle of the Pope”). The southern Rhône’s best-known
appellation, Châteauneuf-du-Pape is close by the striking historic walled city of Avignon,
and has some of the most rocky, breathtaking vineyards in France. And the wine—the
wine is sheer sensuality.
   Châteauneuf, however, is just one of several wine regions in the southern Rhône. The
other two major ones are Gigondas and Vacqueyras, followed by southern France’s self-
styled capital of rosé, Tavel. In addition, most of the Côtes-du-Rhône and Côtes-du-
Rhône-Villages wines come from southern vineyards.
   The southern Rhône does not begin where the north leaves off but about an hour’s drive
farther south. In between, only a few patches of vineyard can be found. The gulf of
separation is significant. The southern and northern Rhône have little in common, except
the river that gives them their names. The differences in climate are major. The southern
Rhône is part of the sunny, herb-scented, lavender-strewn, olive-growing Mediterranean.
Hot days are pierced by Le Mistral, the savage, cold wind that blows down from the Alps
and through the Rhône River valley, gathering speed and ferocity as it goes. Although you
can barely stand up when the mistral is blowing hard, it nonetheless is often a grape
grower’s friend.

      “The inseparable connection in southern France between wine, food, and the
      earth reminds me that wine is a gift from God. In a visceral sense, drinking
      Châteauneuf-du-Pape and eating local sausages becomes a way of
      transcending time, of experiencing that which, though it may seem temporal,
      is, in fact, timeless.”
                                                        — STEVE EDMUNDS,
       co-owner, Edmunds St. John Winery, which specializes in Rhône wines made
                                                                    in California
        THE MAJOR APPELLATIONS, WINES, AND PRINCIPAL
              GRAPES OF THE SOUTHERN RHÔNE
Twenty-three grape varieties are permitted in the southern Rhône, although not all of them are legal in all
appellations. The twenty-three fall into two groups: principal varieties and secondary varieties. The principal
varieties are listed below. Today, many of the secondary varieties are used only in tiny amounts, if they are used at
all. These secondary varieties include, for red wines: calitor, carignan, counoise, gamay, muscardin, pinot noir,
terret noir, and vaccarèse; and for white wines: marsanne, roussanne, picardan, picpoul, viognier, ugni blanc,
macabeo, and muscat blanc à petits grains. Rosé wines can be made from a combination of any of the grapes, red
and white. As always with wine, however, there are some notable exceptions. Roussanne, for example, is the grape
on which Château de Beaucastel’s famous white Châteauneuf-du-Pape Vieilles Vignes is based. There are also
interesting peculiarities. Muscat is grown only in Beaumes-de-Venise. And only Châteauneuf-du-Pape allows
slightly more than half of all the twenty-three varieties (see The Châteauneuf “Thirteen,” page 251).

                                                            PRINCIPAL RED                 PRINCIPAL WHITE
 APPELLATION                   WINES(S) MADE
                                                            GRAPE(S)                      GRAPE(S)

 CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-                                            grenache, syrah,              grenache blanc,
                               red and white
 PAPE                                                       mourvèdre, cinsaut            clairette, bourboulenc

                                                            grenache, syrah,
 GIGONDAS                      red and rosè                                               none
                                                            mourvèdre, cinsaut

                                                            grenache, syrah,              grenache blanc,
 VACQUEYRAS                    red, white, and rosè
                                                            mourvèdre, cinsaut            clairette, bourboulenc

                                                            grenache, syrah,
 RASTEAU                       red                                                        none
                                                            mourvèdre

                                                            grenache, syrah,
 TAVEL                         rosè                                                       clairette, bourboulenc
                                                            mourvèdre, cinsaut

 CÔTES-DU-RHÔNE                                             grenache, syrah,              grenache blanc,
 AND CÔTES-DU-                 red, white, rosè             mourvèdre, cinsaut,           clairette bourboulenc,
 RHÔNE-VILLAGES                                             carignan                      roussane, viognier

 MUSCAT DE                                                                                muscat blanc à petits
                   fortified sweet white                    none
 BEAUMES-DE-VENISE                                                                        grains
                                            LE MISTRAL
 No one who has ever experienced Le Mistral will ever forget it. The treacherous wind (named after the
 Occitan—Provençal—dialect word for masterly, or master) barrels out of the Alps unexpectedly, traveling
 hundreds of miles/kilometers south, picking up speed as it goes. The mistral is especially treacherous by
 the time it gets to the southern Rhône, and caught in it, you can be lifted into the air or slammed to the
 ground.
    The mistral is helpful for vines in some ways; detrimental in others. During the growing season, it cools
 down the vines, helping the grapes retain acidity. Near harvest time it acts like a giant blow-dryer, making
 sure the grapes are free of humidity and mold. The wind also causes substantial evaporation, which then
 concentrates the sugar and acid inside the grapes. The mistral can be so violent, however, that it can rip
 apart the vines. As a result, the best vineyards are found in partly sheltered pockets of land, and the
 vines are pruned low to the ground. The older, gnarled ones look like twisted black dwarfs slanted
 sideways from years of trying to hang on to the earth despite the strong, cold wind whipping through.


   There are significant differences between northern and southern Rhône in the proximity
and orientation of the vineyards to the river. In the north, vineyards are poised above and
so close to the river they almost seem as though they could fall into it. In the south, they
spread out from the river for 20 to 30 miles (32 to 48 kilometers) over flatter land and
gentler hillocks.
   Soil in the south is also fundamentally different from the granitic soils of the north. In
many parts of the south, vines are planted in what looks like a vast carpet of riverbed
rocks, some the size of cantaloupes. Elsewhere, the soils are either clay, sandy limestone,
or gravel.
   Grenache, not syrah, is the leading red grape of the south. But what is even more
significant is that, unlike northern Rhône wines, which are intense wines based on a single
grape variety, southern Rhône wines are almost always, like rainbows of flavor,
combinations of many different varieties. The reason? In the southern Rhône’s hot, dry
climate, such classic grapes as syrah can lose their focus and intensity. Other, less noble
grapes may adapt well to the heat, but they rarely possess enough character on their own
to make a satisfactory wine. Blending is a way of creating a whole wine that is more than
the sum of its parts (see The Major Appellations, Wines, and Principal Grapes of the
Southern Rhône, page 249).
   The southern Rhône has almost sixty cooperatives, and they have amazing clout. They
make dozens—sometimes hundreds—of different blends that they bottle under scores of
brand names, some of which, cleverly, seem like the names of estates. In addition, the
cooperatives sell to dozens of négociants who do the same thing on a smaller scale.
     À droit ou à gauche? A street corner with helpful advice for visiting the wineries of Châteauneuf-du-Pape.


                          THE CHÂTEAUNEUF “THIRTEEN”
         There are actually fourteen grape varieties permitted to be used in Châteauneuf-du-
         Pape, if the white form of grenache is counted independently from the red. The most
         important grapes are listed first.

           RED                                   WHITE

           grenache                              grenache blanc

           syrah                                 clairette

           mourvèdre                             bourboulenc

           cinsaut                               roussanne

           muscardin                             picpoul

           counoise                              picardan

           vaccarèse

           terret noir


   Two additional types of wine are made in the south that, with minor exceptions, cannot
be found in the north: rosés and sweet wines. Tavel, the leading rosé of the southern
Rhône, is also (thanks to tourism in southern France) one of the most well-known rosés in
the world. The south’s sweet wine is equally famous: muscat de Beaumes-de-Venise.
   Of all the southern Rhône’s important wine appellations, the one that can rival the
north’s Côte-Rôtie or Hermitage is Châteauneuf-du-Pape, so it leads off our exploration of
the southern Rhône.

CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE
The most southern of the major southern Rhône wine appellations, Châteauneuf-du-Pape
is just a fifteen-minute drive from the historic city of Avignon. The region, which
encompasses the plateaus and slopes around the town of Châteauneuf-du-Pape, plus four
adjacent villages, is large by Rhône standards—slightly more than 8,000 acres (3,200
hectares) (Hermitage has only about 300 acres/120 hectares). More wine is made in this
one place than in all of the northern Rhône. To put Châteauneuf in perspective, however,
the Napa Valley is more than four times larger, and Bordeaux is thirty-four times larger.
   Before World War I, much of the Châteauneuf-du-Pape harvest was sold in bulk to
Burgundy, to be used as vin de médecine—a quick fix of alcohol to boost Burgundy’s
strength. Decades later, the practice was still commonplace. Only since the 1970s has the
number of quality-minded southern Rhône producers increased significantly, and today
more than any other wines, the top reds of Châteauneuf-du-Pape define the southern
Rhône. They are often not the big, blowsy, easygoing wines you might expect from a
warm Mediterranean region. Just the opposite. These are penetrating, sassy wines that can
come at you with a dagger of earthy, gamy flavors. They have a wildness to them, a
fascinating edge of tar, leather, and rough stone. They beg for a hot night, chewy bread,
and a dish loaded with garlic, black olives, and wild herbs.
                   CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-EXTRATERRESTRIAL
 The vintners of Châteauneuf-du-Pape have always been fastidious when it comes to creating laws that
 will protect their vineyards. In a legendary 1954 municipal decree, they mandated the following:
 ARTICLE 1. The flying overhead, landing, and taking off of aeronautical machines called “flying saucers”
 or “flying cigars,” of whatever nationality they may be, is strictly forbidden on the territory of the commune
 of Châteauneuf-du-Pape.
 ARTICLE 2. Any aeronautical machine—“flying saucer” or “flying cigar”—that lands on the territory of the
 commune will be immediately taken off to the jail. (No joke.)



                       THE NAME CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE
    Châteauneuf-du-Pape, “new castle of the pope,” refers to the time in the fourteenth century when the
    pope resided not in Rome but in the walled city of Avignon, just south of these vineyards. (At the time,
    what we call Châteauneuf-du-Pape was called Châteauneuf-Calcernier, after a nearby village and its
    limestone quarry.) The pope who instigated this startling change in residence was the Frenchman
    Clement V (in Bordeaux, Château Pape-Clément is named after him). Later, his successor, John XXII,
    built a new papal summer home out among the vineyards. It wasn’t until the twentieth century, after vast
    improvements were made in the vineyards and winemaking, that the new name Châteauneuf-du-Pape
    took hold. Today most bottles of estate-grown Châteauneuf-du-Pape are embossed with the papal crown
    and St. Peter’s keys, as an acknowledgment of the region’s holy history.


   Of all the things that set Châteauneuf apart, the most startling is its “soil” composed
largely of smooth, rolled stones. They are everywhere. Many vineyards are simply vast
rock beds with no visible dirt whatsoever. The stones and rocks—known as galets—which
range from fist-size to the size of a small pumpkin, are the remnants of ancient Alpine
glaciers. The withdrawal of these glaciers, along with temperature increases, ripped
quartzite off the flanks of the Alps. Over many millennia, these chunks of quartzite were
rolled, broken, and rounded by the tumultuous waters of the then larger Rhône River. As
the river receded, the stones were left scattered over the plateaus and terraces. Although
there is soil underneath the stones, varying from clay to sandy limestone to gravel, the
land is extremely difficult to work, and tending the vineyards is a painstakingly slow
process.
   What southern Rhône vineyards do not lack is heat. Unfortunately, the stones retain this
heat and therefore hasten ripening. At the same time, however, the stones protect the
ground from becoming parched and dry and help hold moisture in the soil, a boon for the
vines, especially as summer proceeds.
   Approximately 95 percent of Châteauneuf-du-Pape is red, although there are white and
rosé wines. The grapes that can be used are the so-called Châteauneuf thirteen (actually
fourteen)—eight reds and six whites. Almost no producer other than Château de
Beaucastel grows and makes wine from the whole gamut. The majority of Châteauneufs
are based on grenache grown until it is sweetly ripe and tasting like homemade jam.
Blended into the grenache are syrah, to deepen the color and add spice, as well as
mourvèdre, which adds structure. Other red grapes may play a role, too, but none are as
important as these three.
   Among the top Châteauneuf-du-Pape whites are two from Château de Beaucastel: their
leading wine, known as Cuvée Classique, and the rarer Vieilles Vignes (remarkably, made
solely from roussanne); as well as those from Château Rayas, Clos des Papes, Château La
Nerthe, Château de la Gardine, Les Cailloux, and Domaine du Vieux Télégraphe.




    Old bottles lying in the cellars of Vieux Télégraphe in Châteauneuf-du-Pape. The estate was named after an old
  telegraph station that stood on the hill of the Le Crau plateau where the winery was eventually established in 1898.

   Two important factors in the making of Châteauneuf-du-Pape are yield and oak
(actually, the absence of oak). Yield is pivotal because at high yields, the grapes that make
up Châteauneuf all taste terrible and thin. As a result, and not surprisingly, by law,
Châteauneuf-du-Pape is required to have the lowest yields in France—35 hectoliters per
hectare (368 gallons per acre). This is about half the yield at most Bordeaux estates, for
example.
   As for oak, you don’t see many small, new oak barrels in the southern Rhône, and
there’s a reason for that. Grenache is usually vinified in large cement tanks (grenache is
easily susceptible to oxidation, so wooden barrels, which are porous, are not ideal). Wines
made from other grapes, such as syrah and mourvèdre, are usually made in large, old
barrels called foudres. Because the wines are generally not put in small, new oak barrels,
they don’t have the unmistakable toast/vanilla character that new oak imparts. Instead, you
taste what Châteauneuf-du-Papes (as well as Gigondas and Vacqueyras) are truly about:
stones and soil—the unadorned flavors of their terroir.
                                  MADE FOR FROMAGE
Maybe it’s their dark intensity, or the way they evoke an almost primordial earthiness, but Châteauneuf-
du-Pape, Vacqueyras, and Gigondas all beg for a good—a really sensual—cheese. If you visit these
wine regions, there is no better place to find one (or several) than La Fromagerie du Comtat, in the
center of the old walled city of Carpentras, which is about ten minutes from Châteauneuf-du-Pape. The
aroma that hits you as you open the door of the fromagerie assures you that you’re in the right place, for
it’s unmistakably the sort of aroma that would make a U.S. health department inspector blanch. The
cheeses, all handmade raw milk cheeses from local, small farms, are sensational. Don’t miss the tiny
chèvres (goat’s milk cheese) wrapped in chestnut leaves, or the utterly amazing sheep’s milk cheese
wrapped in crushed white wine grapes that have been affected by Botrytis cinerea, or “noble rot.”
         ONE OF THE PLACES WHERE PHYLLOXERA BEGAN
 Just north of Tavel is Lirac, a modest place that makes even more modest wines. But Lirac does have
 one claim to fame: It’s thought to be one of the areas where the European phylloxera epidemic began.
 According to John Livingstone-Learmonth, in The Wines of the Rhône, sometime around 1863 the
 innovative owner of Château de Clary decided to plant a few California vine cuttings to see how they’d
 fare in the south of France. The cuttings, unable to adapt, died. The microscopic insects (phylloxera)
 clinging to the cuttings’ roots survived. Phylloxera destroyed the vineyards at Château de Clary and from
 there spread through neighboring vineyards. But phylloxera’s presence already extended beyond the
 southern Rhône, for at that time Europe permitted extensive importation of living plants. Also in 1863, a
 professor at Oxford University reported finding phylloxera in plants growing outside London. Within a few
 years, there were several reports of the pest in the Languedoc, and by 1869, there was evidence of
 phylloxera in Bordeaux.

   Finally, it’s interesting to note that, in the wake of phylloxera and World War I,
regulations enacted in the early 1920s to improve Châteauneuf-du-Pape later became the
basis for France’s monumental Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC) laws.
         SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE
 Château de Beaucastel • Château de la Gardine • Château La Nerthe • Château Rayas • Clos des Papes •
 Clos du Mont Olivet • Domaine de Beaurenard • Domaine de Chante-Perdrix • Domaine de la Charbonnière
    • Domaine de la Janasse • Domaine du Pégau • Font de Michelle • Le Bosquet des Papes • Le Vieux
                         Donjon • Les Cailloux • M. Chapoutier • Vieux Télégraphe


GIGONDAS
The Gigondas vineyards cover a series of hills just below the jagged spurs of rock known
as the Dentelles de Montmirail. This is the most northern of the important southern Rhône
appellations. A few miles/kilometers south of it is Vacqueyras, and south of that and to the
west is Châteauneuf-du-Pape.




   Maybe Gigondas took its cue from the rugged Dentelles, for its wines are as strong and
appealing as a firm handshake. The best have explosive raspberry, leather, and spice
aromas and flavors and chewy textures. They are often characterized as robust versions of
Châteauneuf, but the truth is they have an altogether different personality. To drink
Gigondas is to go back to a time when great red wines were muscular—a time before
winemakers knew how to soften up wine and give it polish.
The Pont-Saint Bénezet—better known as the Pont d’Avignon—about which many poems and songs have been written.
 The bridge spans the Rhône River within the famous medieval town of Avignon to which the papacy was temporarily
                                    relocated (from Rome) in the 14th century.

   Ninety-nine percent of Gigondas is red; 1 percent is rosé. By law, the reds must be no
more than 80 percent grenache, with no less than 15 percent syrah and/or mourvèdre
blended in. The remaining fraction is often cinsaut, but may be made up of any other red
Rhône grape except carignan.
   The top producers include Domaine du Cayron, Domaine la Garrigue, Les Hauts de
Montmirail, Grand Bourjassot, Domaine Santa Duc, St. Cosme, and Domaine les
Pallières.

VACQUEYRAS
Just south of Gigondas, Vacqueyras became an appellation in 1990. Before that, wines
from this area were labeled Côtes-du-Rhône-Villages. Vacqueyras are sturdy, bold red
wines—rather like even more rustic versions of Gigondas. The best smell and taste like
the land itself; there’s the aroma of sun on the hot, stony ground, of scrappy dried brush
and wild herbs. Charging through this is the flavor of black currants, blueberries, and
pepper.
   Grenache, syrah, mourvèdre, and cinsaut are the dominant grapes. But whereas
Gigondas are weighted toward grenache, most Vacqueyras have significantly higher
percentages of syrah. A minuscule number of white wines and rosés are also made.
                                   BEAUMES-DE-VENISE
Beaumes-de-Venise, one of the top small villages of the southern Rhône, is associated with two types of
wine. The wine simply called Beaumes-de-Venise is a dry red, like its better-known sisters Vacqueyras
and Gigondas. But the village is more famous for its historic fortified sweet wine, muscat de Beaumes-
de-Venise, made from the brazenly aromatic grape muscat blanc à petits grains.
   Drinking a glass of it is a powerful experience thanks to the fortification, and while peach, apricot, and
orange flavors dance in the glass, the wine is not sugary sweet. Indeed, southern Rhône locals often
drink it as an aperitif. Among the best muscats de Beaumes-de-Venise are those from Paul Jaboulet
Aîné, Domaine Durban, Domaine Coyeux, and Vidal-Fleury.
                 AN ANCIENT MEDITERRANEAN MARRIAGE
 Throughout the Mediterranean, the affinity between lamb and wine is centuries old. And for good reason.
 Historically, much of the Mediterranean’s ancient, arid, impoverished soils could support only the least
 demanding crops and livestock. And thus, in regions as diverse as Bordeaux, Greece, north-central
 Spain (Rioja and Ribera del Duero), and southern France (the Rhône and Provence), grazing sheep and
 planting vineyards became a way of life. Today, in each of those wine regions, lamb is considered the
 quintessential accompaniment for the local wine. Which of those wines is best with lamb? An immediate
 answer would be: all of them. Yet, there is something especially satisfying about the rich, gamy flavors of
 lamb fed on the wild herbs and grasses of southern France, then crusted with herbs and roasted, when it
 is mirrored by the Rhône’s rich, wild, gamy wines made from syrah, grenache, and mourvèdre.

    Among the producers to try are Domaine de la Charbonnière, Domaine le Sang des
Cailloux, and, most especially, the sensational Domaine des Amouriers (which seems like
it ought to mean the domain of lovers, but amouriers are actually mulberry trees).




                A stone religious niche in the vineyards of Tardieu-Laurent, Châteauneuf-du-Pape.


TAVEL
Tavel—one of France’s most famous rosés—is precisely the kind of wine you fall in love
with on vacation. What better color than pink when you’re on a beach in St.-Tropez?
   Despite their pretty pink colors, most Tavels are rugged wines with robust, spicy berry
flavors. Bone dry, they have an appealing roughness, an edge that makes them perfect for
washing down southern French dishes laden with garlic, olive oil, and fresh, wild herbs.
   Tavel rosés are made in the tiny, sleepy village of the same name, less than 10 miles (16
kilometers) southwest and across the river from Châteauneuf-du-Pape. No red or white
wines come from here—just rosé. Nine Rhône grapes, both red and white, can be used, but
grenache is generally the leader. Interestingly, the wine is usually made by putting whole
red and white grapes together in a single tank. The weight of the grapes on top begins to
crush the ones below. The pink color comes as the juice sits in contact with the red skins.
As seemingly straightforward as Tavel rosé is, it is not easy to make a good one—one that
has freshness and bright flavors.
   Tavel should be drunk young and chilled, so that its exuberant flavors explode in your
mouth. A delicious one to try: the rosé from Prieuré de Montézargues, a former abbey
founded by monks in the twelfth century.

CÔTES-DU-RHÔNE AND CÔTES-DU-RHÔNE-VILLAGES
Amazingly, 70 percent of all Rhône wines are Côtes-du-Rhône and Côtes-du-Rhône-
Villages. Unlike Côte-Rôtie, Hermitage, or Châteauneuf-du-Pape, however, wines with
these two designations do not come from a single place. Instead, the terms refer to wines
made from grapes that, in the case of Côtes-du-Rhône specifically, are grown on vast, non-
contiguous tracts of less prestigious vineyards totaling more than 148,000 acres (59,900
hectares). You’ll find both appellations all over the Rhône Valley, although most vineyards
are in the south. Alas, the quality of these wines ranges all over the board, from wines that
have little going for them to sensational, juicy, spicy wines with real character.
  The relatively large, reputable Rhône producers like E. Guigal, M. Chapoutier, and
Beaucastel all make dependable Côtes-du-Rhône, and so do a number of small producers.
    So just what are the differences between Côtes-du-Rhône and Côtes-du-Rhône-
Villages? Côtes-du-Rhône is the basic appellation; theoretically, Côtes-du-Rhône-Villages
is a step up in quality. Generally speaking, this is true. However, several of the very best
wines of all are simply Côtes-du-Rhône, so no hard-and-fast rules can be made. You
should know this, however: Of the ninety-five tiny villages legally entitled to make Côtes-
du-Rhône-Villages, fewer than twenty are considered superior, and in recognition of that
fact, they are allowed to append their name to the appellation as, for example, with
Cairanne Côtes-du-Rhône-Villages.
  As for top producers, look for Château de Fonsalette (made by Château Rayas),
Domaine Gramenon (especially its wine called Cuvée de Laurentides), St.-Cosme,
Domaine Santa Duc, Domaine du Trignon, Domaine Le Clos des Lumières, Jean-Luc
Colombo (especially the red Les Forots and white Les Figuières), and Domaine de la
Renjarde.
         WHEN YOU VISIT… THE RHÔNE VALLEY
THE OLD CELLARS of the Rhône Valley were built on sites dating back to the
Romans. The wineries themselves are generally small, modest, and practical: often
with dirt floors and lots of cobwebs. The tasting table may be an old board balanced
between two barrels. It is almost always necessary to have an appointment, and it is
greatly helpful to speak French.
IN THE SOUTHERN RHÔNE, visit the historic city of Avignon, the papal seat in the
fourteenth century, and be sure to see the massive gothic palace, the Palais des
Papes. In addition, the old city of Orange boasts some of the best-preserved Roman
ruins in the world. Indeed, the Ancient Theater is the most intact Roman theater in the
world, and the acoustics are still so perfect that the internationally acclaimed opera
festival, Les Chorégies d’Orange, is held there every summer.
THE RHÔNE VALLEY is full of small country restaurants that make you feel as though
you’ve stepped into the France of a half century ago where la cuisine de grandmère still
deliciously dominates. And if you’re in the mood to smell and “taste” the sea, Marseilles,
and its many restaurants specializing in bouillabaisse, is less than 70 miles (110
kilometers) away from Châteauneuf.
                  The Southern Rhône Wines to Know
Southern Rhône wines have a sumptuousness that is undeniable. From aroma to flavor to texture, the wines below
are uninhibited, sophisticated, and sensual—just what you’d expect from the south of France. I’d be happy to spend
years drinking the wines of just this one place, for place speaks explosively and deliciously here.

                                                     WHITES




                                     CHÂTEAU DE BEAUCASTEL
                                 CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE | VIEILLES VIGNES
                                                   100% roussanne
If ever there was a wine that you’d like to smell for eternity, this is it. The utterly refined, totally sensual top white
from Château de Beaucastel has no equal in Châteauneuf-du-Pape. Made entirely from roussanne from a patch of
eighty-year-old vines, it’s unearthly in its complexity and in the way the flavors of honey, roasted nuts, quince, and
crème brûlée embrace your tongue. And this is a dry wine! When young—and with age—it’s a showstopper.
Beaucastel’s owners, the Perrin family, drink this, drinks this with another southern Rhône masterpiece: buttery
scrambled eggs cooked with the local black truffles.
                                                     REDS
                                   CHÂTEAU DE SAINT COSME
                                                   GIGONDAS
                                    80% grenache, 15% syrah, 5% cinsaut
In medieval times, doctors regularly prescribed wine for various ailments, including the wine Saint Cosme
(pronounced comb), a nice coincidence since St. Cosme is the patron saint of medicine. I’m not sure if this wine is
healing, but it’s wonderfully hedonistic and very evocative of its terroir. Imagine leather and cherry jam somehow
combined and then poured over minerals and black earth, and you’ve got this gripping Gigondas.




                                            CHÂTEAU LA NERTHE

                                           CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE
             Approximately 50% grenache, 20% mourvèdre, 20% syrah, 5% cinsaut, 5% other
Château La Nerthe (pronounced la NAIRT) was built in 1760, and it is unquestionably one of the most majestic
sites in Châteauneuf-du-Pape. The precious old vineyards ring the graceful, grand château, which also houses
immaculate (rather rare in France) winemaking cellars. And the wine is stupendous. Long and saturated on the
palate, it is suffused with the flavors of chocolate, espresso, grenadine, game, spices, and stones. As with all top
Châteauneufs, there’s real grip here, but also real elegance. In addition, La Nerthe makes a special (more expensive)
Châteauneuf called Cuvée des Cadettes. One of the rare Châteauneufs to be aged in 100 percent new oak, it’s a
massive wine that has a dark, minerally lusciousness, as if rocks were coated in black licorice. Cuvée des Cadettes
is often most expressive after a decade of aging.
                                          CHÂTEAU DE BEAUCASTEL

                                            CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE
                          Approximately 30% grenache, 60% mourvèdre, 10% syrah
In what seems like an impossibility, Beaucastel’s Châteauneuf-du-Pape hits the palate with all five basic tastes
moving at full throttle—salty, bitter, sour, sweet, and savory. It’s a shocking first sip. But maybe not as shocking as
the aroma—a feral immersion into leather, offal, and animal notes. Some love this about Beaucastel and find the
wine distinctive and complex; for other tasters, it’s the most unsettling Châteauneuf. I promise you this: Tasting it,
you won’t be bored.




                                     DOMAINE DU VIEUX TÉLÉGRAPHE

                                            CHÂTEAUNEUF-DU-PAPE
                          Approximately 70% grenache, 15% syrah, 15% mourvèdre
Known for wines with grip, complexity, and elegance, Vieux Télégraphe (“old telegraph”) is one of the great
historic estates of Châteauneuf. When first poured, the wine seems almost biting, with its sharp tar, earth, and spice
aromas and flavors. But after a short time in the glass, the texture begins to turn to cashmere and a wealth of other
gamy and boysenberry jam flavors emerge. Vieux Télégraphe’s vineyards are beds of stone.
                                    DOMAINE LE SANG DES CAILLOUX

                                                  VACQUEYRAS
                   Approximately 65% grenache, 20% syrah, 10% mourvèdre, 5% cinsaut
Translated, the name of the domaine is the blood of stones. No title could be more perfect, for while juicy and
sensual, this Vacqueyras nonetheless smells and tastes like hard stone. At first. Then, right behind the stoniness,
comes a mouthful of what the southern French call garrigue—that flavor of the Rhône and Provence, reminiscent
of wild thyme and rosemary, dry scrub brush, and warm earth. Did I forget to mention blueberries? This is one of
the most complex, satisfying Vacqueyras around.




                                          DOMAINE LES PALLIÈRES

                                                   GIGONDAS
                             80% grenache, 10% syrah, 5% mourvèdre, 5% other
On the beautiful, sloping hills of Gigondas sits the old estate Les Pallières. In 1998, just about the best thing
possible happened to this estate: It was bought by the Brunier family (owners of Vieux Télégraphe) and the
American wine importer Kermit Lynch. Under their direction, the wines have become stunning. Gamy, peppery,
sweetly rich, explosively fruity, and with a soaring structure, Pallières is once again one of the top Gigondas.
THE LOIRE

The Loire is the most diverse wine region in France. Just about every style of wine is
made here, from dry still wines to snappy sparkling wines to elegant, long-lived sweet
wines. The most familiar of these are the white still wines Sancerre, Pouilly-Fumé,
Muscadet, and Vouvray. Yet the Loire is also well known for rosés, reds, and sparkling
wines. Indeed, rosé d’Anjou and reds such as Chinon are comforting fixtures in Parisian
bistros, where they are served with everything from grilled sausages to onion soup.
   The Loire is defined by the massive, often writhing Loire River—France’s longest—as
well as the surreal pastoral valley (known as the garden of France) that extends along its
banks. Thanks to silt, the river is now too shallow to be navigated, but it was once a
flowing engine of transport. Thus, even as early as the Middle Ages, Loire Valley wines
were being shipped north to Flanders and Britain.
    For its part, the river erupts from deep within the volcanic peaks of the Massif Central,
in the heart of France. From there, it flows north for about 300 miles (480 kilometers),
makes a left turn, and then flows west for another 300 miles until it pushes out into the
Atlantic. It is in this east-west, 300-mile stretch that all of the Loire’s best wine regions are
found. Farthest east is Pouilly-Fumé and its neighbor, Sancerre. Farthest west, a five-hour
drive away, is Muscadet, bordering the Atlantic Ocean. In between are more than sixty-
three appellations. Indeed, were it not for the wild river connecting them, the diverse wine
areas of the Loire would never share the same pages in a book. In the pages that follow,
we will examine the Loire in the above direction. We’ll start with the far inland, eastern
Loire (Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé), then look at the middle Loire (Vouvray, Savennières,
Quarts de Chaume, Chinon, and Bourgueil, among others), and finally end with the
western Loire (Muscadet).

                          THE QUICK SIP ON THE LOIRE
         THE LOIRE is one of the largest and most diverse wine regions in France. Virtually
         every type of wine is made there—still and sparkling; dry and sweet; red, white, and
         rosé.
         THE SIGNATURE characteristic of all Loire wines is their zesty freshness.
         THE LEADING WHITE GRAPES of the Loire—chenin blanc and sauvignon blanc—
         make wines that are so extraordinary, they are, in many cases, the world’s standard-
         bearers for these grapes.

   But before delving into these three main areas, here are a few more important points to
know. The Loire is one of France’s larger wine regions (although it is smaller than in times
past, when it was the main supplier of wine to Paris and northern countries). Slightly more
than 124,000 acres (50,200 hectares) are planted with vines, making the region just less
than half the size of Bordeaux. Of France’s wine regions, however, the Loire is the least
easy to characterize. Those sixty-three appellations produce wines that, in almost every
way, are more different than they are similar. Except for one thing: The wines all share a
taut, wiry freshness thanks to the region’s cool, northern climate. Like Champagne, the
Loire exists on the fringe of the lowest temperatures at which grapes can ripen. Often the
vines have not even begun to flower (that is, produce tiny flowers that, once fertilized, will
become grapes) until June 1, a month and a half behind warmer places like the Napa
Valley, in California. While in difficult, rainy years, this can be agonizing for local
growers (and result in chaptalization of the wines, see page 52), the cool climate can also
be a plus, leading to elegant, lacy wines with haunting precision (the result of high
acidity). In great years, the best wines can have such dynamic tension they seem poised on
a tightrope, or even spring loaded. In French, their refreshing vigor is described as
nervosité.
   Wine estates in the Loire Valley are generally small and often family owned. In the
past, little capital was available for expansion or major improvements. This opened the
door for the creation of cooperatives, as well as a widespread network of négociants, who
buy wines, blend them, and then bottle them under their own labels. As of 2013, there
were about a hundred négociants and some twenty cooperatives in the Loire.
   The two leading white grapes of the Loire are sauvignon blanc and chenin blanc. Both
originated in the Loire Valley, and as both have savagnin as a parent, they are most likely
siblings or half siblings. For its part, sauvignon blanc has gone on to make inspired wines
everywhere from New Zealand to Austria. But chenin blanc is a different story; it has
seemingly retreated back to its homeland. Today, chenin blanc achieves extraordinary
heights only in the Loire Valley—especially in the top, mesmerizing wines from Vouvray,
Savennières, Coteaux du Layon, Coteaux de l’Aubance, and Quarts de Chaume.




         Peter Hahn, owner of Le Clos de la Meslerie, holds a chunk of flint from his vineyard in Vouvray.
                             THE GRAPES OF THE LOIRE
                                              WHITES
 ARBOIS: Minor grape native to the Loire. The use of arbois (in small amounts in blends) is declining.
 CHARDONNAY: Minor grape. Found in blends for both white and sparkling wines of the middle Loire.
 CHENIN BLANC: Major grape, also called pineau de la Loire. Historically, the most important grape of
 the middle Loire, used for numerous wines, including Savennières and Vouvray. Wines made from it may
 be still or sparkling, dry or sweet.
 FOLLE BLANCHE: Minor grape. Used to make the wine called Gros Plant in the Muscadet region of the
 western Loire.
 MELON DE BOURGOGNE: The source of Muscadet, in the western Loire.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: Major indigenous grape. Used to make the famous wines Sancerre and Pouilly-
 Fumé, as well as Menetou-Salon, Reuilly, and Quincy, plus many simple whites from the middle Loire.

                                                REDS
 CABERNET FRANC: Major grape. The source of the best Loire reds, Chinon, Bourgueil, and St.-
 Nicolas-de-Bourgueil. Also used as a blending grape in the reds, rosés, and sparkling wines of the
 middle Loire.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON, CÔT (MALBEC), PINEAU D’AUNIS, AND PINOT MEUNIER: Minor grapes.
 Used as blending components in the red, rosé, and sparkling wines of the middle Loire.
 GAMAY: The grape that makes Anjou and Touraine gamay. Also a blending grape for red, rosé, and
 sparkling wines of the middle and eastern Loire.
 GROLLEAU: Native grape. Usually the dominant grape in Rosé d’Anjou. Also blended into other rosé,
 red, and sparkling wines of the middle Loire.
 PINOT NOIR: Used for the red wines of Sancerre and the eastern Loire, and as a blending grape in the
 reds, rosés, and sparkling wines of the middle Loire.

   Most of the best Loire reds and rosés are made from cabernet franc, although seven
other red grapes are grown, including cabernet sauvignon, pinot noir, gamay, and native
varieties, such as grolleau. Loire reds are unmistakably stamped by their northern climate.
Zesty and vivid, they are appreciated precisely because they are energetic and fresh, not
weighty or full-bodied.
                            THE EASTERN LOIRE:
              SANCERRE, POUILLY-FUMÉ, AND MENETOU-SALON

The eastern Loire may be 300 miles (480 kilometers) from Muscadet and the Atlantic
coast, but it’s less than half that distance from Paris, and the region’s main wines—
Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé—are accordingly well known. The dry whites from Menetou-
Salon are also from this easternmost part of the Loire, as are the less well-known regions
of Reuilly and Quincy. All are made from sauvignon blanc.

                   THE MOST IMPORTANT LOIRE WINES
                                LEADING APPELLATIONS
         BOURGUEIL red
         CHINON red
         CRÉMANT DE LOIRE white (sparkling)
         MENETOU-SALON white
         MONTLOUIS white (dry and sweet)
         MUSCADET white
         POUILLY-FUMÉ white
         QUARTS DE CHAUME white (sweet)
         SANCERRE white
         SAVENNIÈRES white
         VOUVRAY white (dry, sweet, and sparkling)

                                APPELLATIONS OF NOTE
         ANJOU-VILLAGES red
         BONNEZEAUX white (sweet)
         COTEAUX DE L’AUBANCE white (sweet)
         COTEAUX DU LAYON white (sweet)
         QUINCY white
         REUILLY white, red, and rosé
         ROSÉ D’ANJOU rosé
         ST.-NICOLAS-DE-BOURGUEIL red
         SAUMUR-CHAMPIGNY red
         SPARKLING SAUMUR white (sparkling)
         SPARKLING TOURAINE white (sparkling)
         SPARKLING VOUVRAY white (sparkling)
         TOURAINE white and red

   But that’s saying it too simply, for Loire sauvignon blancs are in no way routine,
herbal-inflected sauvignon blancs. With their racy, flinty, tangy, and smoky flavors, the
best of these wines are true to the word sauvignon’s root, sauvage, meaning “untamed.”
They are the world’s model for frisky, nervy, pinpoint-focused sauvignon blanc, and are
considered some of the best white wine matches for food. (Most are fermented in stainless
steel and undergo no malolactic fermentation, although some are made or aged in barrel.)
    The vineyards of Sancerre are spread over chalky limestone and flint hills near the
small town of the same name on the western bank of the river. (In the late spring, the
rolling green hills are covered in red poppies, making the whole area appear like the fall-
asleep scene in The Wizard of Oz.) While the soils here are disparate, thanks to abrupt fault
lines running through the region, many of the soils are highly valued for what growers say
is the minerality they contribute to the wines. These soils include Kimmeridgian-era
limestone (limestone and clay imbedded with sea fossils); Portlandian-era limestone
(straight limestone without many sea fossils); the so-called terres blanches (“white
earth”), which is chalk on top of clay; and les caillottes, gravel intermixed with limestone.
In addition, about 30 percent of the vineyards here contain silex, a flint- and sand-based
soil that combines clay, limestone, and silica. Highly desired locally, silex is said to give
the best wines their especially vivid minerality and dramatic freshness.




  The village of Sancerre and its vineyards. Lying on well-drained, perfectly sunlit slopes, the vineyards are located
 slightly lower on the hillsides than the domes of the hills (which, more exposed to the climate, are better for forests).


                                IT TAKES TWO TO BE TANGY
    Although many of us immediately think of red wine when we think of cheese, the tangy, creamy, chalky,
    salty, and fatty flavors of most goat cheeses can neutralize the flavor of many red wines. Sancerre and
    Pouilly-Fumé, on the other hand, are perfect counterpoints, in part because they are so tangy themselves.
    In particular, the combination of Sancerre and Crottin de Chavignol, a small disk of goat cheese from the
    nearby village of Chavignol, is considered to be a French classic. (Crottin is French slang for goat turd.)
   There are a number of excellent vineyards here, but the three called Le Grand
Chemarin, Chêne Marchand, and Clos de la Poussie are especially exemplary. As of the
mid-1990s, however, a curious Sancerre ruling prevented wine producers from using the
name of the vineyard on their labels. Wine producers therefore resorted to “creative” ways
of letting consumers know where the grapes came from. The producer Jean-Max Roger,
for example, calls his tangy and deliciously exotic top Sancerre “Cuvée GC” (meaning
Grand Chemarin). There are many first-rate Sancerre producers. Among them: Cotat
Frères, Pascal Cotat, Lucien Crochet, Henry Pellé, Domaine Laporte, Reverdy-Ducroux,
Matthias et Emile Roblin, Domaine Prieur Pierre et Fils, Domaine Vincent Delaporte,
Pascal Jolivet, André Neveu, and as just mentioned, Jean-Max Roger.
   A final word on Sancerre: Although the very word brings to mind white wine, red and
rosé Sancerres are also made. Red Sancerre, in fact, accounts for about 12 percent of the
total production. Both red and rosé Sancerres are made from pinot noir with some gamay.
   Opposite Sancerre, on the eastern bank of the Loire, is the town of Pouilly-sur-Loire. In
Pouilly (poo YEE) the landscape is more gentle and the soil contains slightly more
limestone and flint. This soil, it was believed, gave the wine a more pronounced gunflint
or smoky flavor, hence the name of the wine—Pouilly-Fumé. (The word fumé means
“smoke;” Pouilly is a reference to the Roman general Paulus, who presided here.) In truth,
few people except perhaps local experts can tell Pouilly-Fumé and Sancerre apart in a
blind tasting.

                     THE SECRET TO MARRIAGE: ACIDITY
    Two of the Loire’s most famous wines, Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé, are among the world’s most flexible
    when it comes to pairing wine with food. The reason is: acidity. Bone-dry and refreshing, both Sancerre
    and Pouilly-Fumé possess the kind of clean, bracing acidity that can counterbalance a surprising ethnic
    diversity of dishes, from Chinese chicken salad to shrimp tacos with guacamole. At the same time, both of
    these sauvignon blanc–based wines are dramatic enough so that their own flavors are not subdued by
    most foods. As for a time-honored partnership, Sancerre or Pouilly-Fumé with seafood is certainly one.
    (The Loire boasts a number of seafood festivals, including an oyster fair, a crayfish fair, and even a deep-
    fried fish fair.)




       Crottins of goat cheese from the village of Chavignol, one of the culinary treasures of the Loire Valley.

    As noted, a small number of new-wave Sancerres and Pouilly-Fumés, made in small
oak barrels, have appeared since the 1980s. The best producer of this style was the late so-
called “wild man of Pouilly,” Didier Dagueneau (an ex–motorcycle racer with no formal
training as a winemaker), whose intensely delicious barrel-fermented and barrel-aged
Pouilly-Fumés set off a quiet storm of controversy in the Loire. The wines, now made by
Dagueneau’s son Louis-Benjamin Dagueneau (under whose name the wines are now
labeled), are complex, lush, super-rich, full-bodied, and expensive—especially the ones
called Pur Sang (the name means “pure blood”) and Silex (“flint”). These are not to be
missed by anyone who loves Loire wines. Along with the Louis-Benjamin Dagueneau
wines, other top producers include: Ladoucette, Francis Blanchet, Domaine Seguin et Fils,
and Domaine Serge Dagueneau et Filles (second cousins of the Didier/Louis-Benjamin
clan).
   The eastern Loire has three other appellations that are perhaps less well known outside
of France itself. Menetou-Salon, just west of Sancerre, can make sauvignon blanc with all
the fireworks of the best Sancerre and Pouilly-Fumé. Among the top producers are Henry
Pellé (also known for his Sancerres), Domaine Jean Teiller, and Domaine de Chatenoy.
               COULÉE DE SERRANT—MODEL BIODYNAMICS
 One of the Loire’s most famous and longest-lived whites, Clos de la Coulée de Serrant, comes from a
 17-acre (7-hectare) vineyard that was one of the first vineyards in the modern era to be farmed according
 to biodynamic principles. First propounded by the Austrian philosopher Rudolf Steiner in the 1920s, and
 later developed by his followers, biodynamics is a holistic system of “living agriculture” whereby the soil
 and plants growing in it are nurtured through natural forces. Biodynamics envisions soils and plants as
 living in a “middle world” influenced from below by the forces of the earth and elements, and influenced
 from above by the cosmos (see Biodynamic Viticulture in the Mastering Wine section, page 34).
    The Joly family, owners of Coulée de Serrant since 1959, believe that modern agricultural methods
 have thoroughly ravaged the earth’s soils. They have become the leading proponents of biodynamics
 worldwide and have influenced a number of other famous French producers to adopt the practice,
 including Domaine Leroy in Vosne-Romanée, Burgundy, and M. Chapoutier in the Rhône.




Château de Brissac in Anjou, built in 1621. Privately held today by the 14th Duke of Brissac, the château still produces
                                                   a range of wines.

  Quincy and Reuilly are two tiny appellations near the river Cher, a tributary of the
Loire. Again, the sauvignons can be quite crisp and delicious—and less expensive than
Sancerre or Pouilly-Fumé.
                                 THE MIDDLE LOIRE:
    SAVENNIÈRES, QUARTS DE CHAUME, COTEAUX DU LAYON, ROSÉS
        D’ANJOU, VOUVRAY, CHINON, BOURGUEIL, AND OTHERS

The middle Loire is where the Loire can get especially confusing, because there are so
many (often overlapping) appellations and wine styles. This is where the best rosés and
reds are made (Rosé d’Anjou and Chinon, for example), as well as sparkling wines
(Crémant de Loire) and whites that are sometimes dry, sometimes medium-sweet, and
sometimes sweet (Vouvray). While several grape varieties are grown, the leading white
grape is chenin blanc, and the leading red, cabernet franc.
   The middle Loire is divided into two general, broad areas known as Anjou-Saumur and
Touraine. Anjou-Saumur, in the west near the city of Angers, includes the appellations
Savennières, Quarts de Chaume, Bonnezeaux, Coteaux du Layon, and Coteaux de
l’Aubance, all of which produce white wines.
  Touraine, in the east near the city of Tours, includes the appellations Chinon,
Bourgueil, and St.-Nicolas-de-Bourgueil, which produce red wines, and Vouvray and
Montlouis, which produce white wines.

SAVENNIÈRES
The middle Loire’s most extraordinary dry white wine, Savennières, is possibly the
greatest dry chenin blanc in the world. Made in a tiny area just southwest of the city of
Angers, in Anjou-Samur, Savennières are densely flavored wines with such intensity, grip,
minerality, and taut acidity that they can be aged for decades. The vineyards are spread
over steep, south-facing slopes of volcanic schist. Yields from these vineyards are among
the lowest in the Loire, which accounts, in part, for Savennières’ concentration and depth
of flavor. The Loire wine expert Jacqueline Friedrich calls Savennières the most cerebral
wine in the world. But sheer hedonistic flavors are operating here, too, for Savennières
tastes like nothing else. It’s a whirlwind of quince, chamomile, honey, and cream, all
pierced by a lightning bolt of citrus.

                           SIDETRACKED BY TARTE TATIN
    One of the most famous rustic desserts of France, tarte tatin originated in the Touraine region of the
    Loire, in the tiny village of Lamotte-Beuvron. An upside-down caramelized apple tart, it was created in
    the nineteenth century by two sisters, Stephanie and Caroline Tatin, owners of the Hôtel-Terminus Tatin,
    a wayside stop for travelers across from the train station. Tarte tatin is the perfect accompaniment for
    one of the Loire’s other prizes—Quarts de Chaume, the gorgeously sweet, lightly honeyed dessert wine
    made from chenin blanc grapes.
               LOIRE SPARKLING AND CRÉMANT DE LOIRE
 One of the middle Loire Valley’s specialties is French bubbles at an unfussy price. Indeed, more
 sparkling wine is made in the Loire than in any other French region except Champagne. Loire sparkling
 wines fall into two categories: first, the large general category known as Crémant de Loire, and second,
 sparkling wines from a specific smaller appellation—sparkling Saumur, sparkling Vouvray, sparkling
 Touraine, and so forth. All are made according to the traditional (Champagne) method of secondary
 fermentation inside each bottle.
    Crémant de Loire—a simple splash of a wine—is usually based on chardonnay, but chenin blanc and
 cabernet franc are also often used and the law allows for any other grape grown in the Loire Valley.
 Crémant de Loire is aged just a year on the yeast lees (far less than in Champagne), and is generally
 made in a dry (brut) style. As for sparklers from small appellations, such as sparkling Samur, a grab bag
 of different grape varieties can be used, including chenin blanc, chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, cabernet
 franc, cabernet sauvignon, côt (malbec), gamay, pinot noir, pineau d’Aunis, and grolleau. Idiosyncratic
 but fun, these sparklers are also dry and aged only briefly on the yeast lees.

   Among the great producers of Savennières are Domaine des Baumard, Château
d’Epiré, Château de Chamboureau, and Domaine du Closel. But the most famous of all
Savennières is Clos de la Coulée de Serrant, considered one of the greatest white wines in
the world. Coulée de Serrant is made on the single estate also called Coulée de Serrant.
The prized vineyard (first planted by monks in the year 1130) is owned by the Joly family
(see box Coulée de Serrant—Model Biodynamics, page 267). Though it is just 17 acres (7
hectares) in size, Coulée de Serrant has its own appellation. (Only a handful of other
appellations in France are made up of a single property, including Romanée-Conti, La
Tâche, and Clos de Tart, all in Burgundy, and Château-Grillet in the Rhône.)

QUARTS DE CHAUME AND THE SWEET WINES OF THE MIDDLE LOIRE
The Anjou-Samur part of the middle Loire is devoted to a slew of medium-sweet or fully
sweet whites that carry the appellations Quarts de Chaume, Bonnezeaux, Coteaux du
Layon, or Coteaux de l’Aubance. The vineyards for these sweet wine appellations are
spread out along the steep slate, schist, and clay slopes that form the banks of the Layon
River, a tributary of the Loire. In good years, the grapes receive just the right combination
of morning moisture from the river, followed by afternoon sun, for Botrytis cinerea, or
“noble rot,” to form. Thus, each of these wines gets much of its complexity from botrytis
(as does Sauternes).
   In all four appellations the wines are always made from chenin blanc, which, here in
the middle Loire (although virtually no place else in the world), exudes gorgeous floral,
peach, apricot, and ripe red apple flavors. Yet the wines, even when made in a sweet style,
are also naturally taut and energetic thanks to high acidity in the grapes and the “cool”
soils. The smallest appellation and most prestigious of these wines, Quarts de Chaume,
can be an absolute masterpiece, with soaring elegance, lightness, sheerness, and purity of
fruit.
   Among the wonderful wines to try from this part of the Loire are the Quarts de Chaume
from Domaine des Baumard and Château de Bellerive, as well as the Bonnezeaux from
Domaine de la Sansonnière.
THE ROSÉS OF ANJOU
Just over half the wine produced in the Anjou-Samur part of the middle Loire is not white,
but delicious rosé—the kind of rosé meant to be chilled cold and then disappear quickly
over a family meal. Rosé d’Anjou is usually low in alcohol (often no more than 11.5
percent) and ever so slightly “tender,” as the locals say (meaning it has 1 to 1.5 percent
residual sugar). It’s usually made primarily from the local red grolleau grape, although
five other red grapes can be part of the blend: gamay, cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon,
côt (aka malbec), and pineau d’Aunis.
   A curious version of rosé d’Anjou is rosé Cabernet d’Anjou—made solely from
cabernet franc or cabernet sauvignon. Although the thought of cabernet is appealing, a
rosé with green flavors (a characteristic of cabernet) is something of an acquired taste. To
counterbalance the “gherkin” effect, more residual sugar is left in rosé cabernet d’Anjou
than in rosé d’Anjou.




   Wines from two of the great sweet wine appellations of the Loire: Coteaux de L’Aubance and Quarts de Chaume.
                               VOUVRAY–DRY TO SWEET
 Vouvray can be made at four official levels of dryness/sweetness, according to the amount of residual
 sugar in the wine. Like Champagne or German riesling, however, the actual impression of sweetness for
 any given Vouvray is based not only on the quantity of residual sugar present, but also on the degree of
 acidity. Thus, a Vouvray with, say, 1 percent residual sugar (the classic, main style) generally tastes
 totally dry, since Vouvray possesses a soaring level of acidity. A Vouvray label may not indicate the level
 of sweetness of the wine.

                                         SEC (VERY DRY)
 0% TO 0.8% RESIDUAL SUGAR (8 grams or less of sugar per liter)

         CLASSIC OR DEMI-SEC (PERCEIVED AS DRY ON THE
                           PALATE)
 0.8% TO 1.2% RESIDUAL SUGAR (8 to 12 grams of sugar per liter)
    As you can see, the classic version of Vouvray has some minor sweetness to balance the wine’s high
 acidity. These are sometimes called by the French term demi-sec, which means “half dry.”

        MOELLEUX (MEDIUM SWEET; LITERALLY, “MELLOW”)
 1.2% TO 4.5% RESIDUAL SUGAR (12 to 45 grams of sugar per liter)

                                   DOUX (QUITE SWEET)
 MORE THAN 4.5% RESIDUAL SUGAR (more than 45 grams of sugar per liter)




                                  Château de la Grille, one of the top Chinons.


CHINON, BOURGUEIL, AND ST.-NICOLAS-DE-BOURGUEIL
The Touraine, a fairly large area in the middle Loire, due east of Anjou-Saumur, surrounds
the city of Tours. It is a wine region befitting Cinderella. Centuries-old storybook
châteaux, replete with turrets, moats, and drawbridges, rise up from verdant rolling fields
and vineyards. The châteaux were built by seventeenth-and eighteenth-century aristocrats
attracted by the agricultural wealth and abundance of the region.




Chinon and its famous cabernet franc vineyards as viewed from the Château Chinon, built in the 10th century on the site
                  of earlier castles. Chinon lies along the Vienne River, a tributary of the Loire River.

   Touraine is where the climate shifts from the milder western Loire (Muscadet),
influenced by the Atlantic, to the eastern Loire (Sancerre, etc.), with its hot summers and
extremely cold winters. The top vineyards in Touraine seem to have gotten the best of
both worlds—mildness as well as warmth, a situation ideal for red wines.
   The three most famous red wine appellations of the Loire are found here: Chinon,
Bourgueil (it only looks hard to pronounce; it’s bore-GOY), and St.-Nicolas-de-Bourgueil.
All three types of wine are almost always made entirely from cabernet franc. Of the three,
Chinon is generally the fullest and most elegant. But the quality of all three has increased
greatly in recent years, as top estates incorporate more gentle maceration techniques,
helping the wines achieve richness and freshness, while avoiding a hard tannic grippiness.
No bona fide bistro is ever without red wines from at least one of these three places,
especially in summer, when they are served cool. Among the most delicious of these reds
are the Chinons from Charles Joguet, Domaine Bernard Baudry, Domaine du Roncée,
Château de la Grille, Philippe Alliet, and Domaine de la Perrière, and the Bourgueils from
Pierre-Jacques Druet.
   Chinon, Bourgueil, and St.-Nicolas-de-Bourgueil can vary quite a bit with the vintage.
In good years, when the cabernet franc grapes ripen fully, the wines burst with raspberry,
violet, cassis, licorice, and briary/spicy flavors, but in poor years, the wines that are not
from the very best producers can be on the thin side.
   Two final notes: If you are in the Loire, you’ll also encounter basic Touraine Rouge
(largely forgettable generic red), and you may encounter a fantastic specialty that you
should not miss tasting: white Chinon made from chenin blanc. From a top producer, such
as Trois Coteaux or Domaine de la Noblaie, it’s an exquisite, complex, minerally, dry
white wine that can be quite exotic.




          The chenin blanc vineyards of Gaston Huet sit peacefully in front of the bell tower of Vouvray.


VOUVRAY AND MONTLOUIS
One white wine appellation of the middle Loire is well known the world over: Vouvray,
made from 100 percent chenin blanc. No other place in the world produces chenin blancs
that are so gossamer, richly flavored, and honeyed—even when dry. (Just across the Loire
River is Vouvray’s “little sister,” Montlouis—also all chenin blanc—although the wines
here are not as exciting.) Most astonishing of all is how long a great Vouvray lasts. It
would seem counterintuitive that a white wine could taste vibrant and luxurious after half
a century or more, but the top Vouvrays can and do (the wines’ ultra-high level of acidity
preserves them). Not surprisingly, these have always been collector’s wines. Top is an
important word here, for truly great Vouvray exists alongside a small ocean of basic, nice-
tasting commercial examples for which a low price is the main attraction. Among the top
Vouvrays I love are those from Domaine le Haut Lieu (Gaston Huet), Domaine de la
Fontainerie, Domaine des Aubuisières, Philippe Foreau, Champalou, and Le Clos de
Meslerie.
   Vouvray can be dry (sec), medium dry (demi-sec; sometimes called classic), or medium
sweet (moelleux). Medium dry is the traditional main style, but even with a modest
amount of residual sugar, classic Vouvray generally tastes completely dry and balanced
thanks to its dramatic acidity. In addition, a share of the total production is sometimes, but
not always, made into sparkling Vouvray. The amount of sparkling wine depends on the
weather. Vouvray has one of the coolest climates in the Loire. Harvests here are some of
the latest in Europe—as late as in, say, Germany, often well into November. Thus, in
extremely cool years when the acidity in the grapes remains high, some producers may
make twice as much sparkling wine as still. In warmer years with riper grapes, the
situation flip-flops and more still wines are made—both dry and sweet.
   The best medium-sweet (moelleux, literally “mellow”) Vouvrays are always the product
of Botrytis cinerea, the beneficial fungus that also produces Sauternes. As in many areas
of the middle Loire, the vineyards of Vouvray get just the right proportion and progression
of sun, moisture, and dryness to be infected with the “noble rot.”




   Château Chenonceau, was built in 1513 on the Cher River, a tributary of the Loire, to make it easily accessible to
    Parisian royalty who often came to stay. Still private, it is considered the most impressive castle in France after
    Versailles. The château is owned by the Menier family, who were once well known for their chocolate business.

   Because they are also full of daggerlike acidity, Vouvray’s greatest sweet wines are an
extraordinary taste sensation. When the tension of opposites—sweetness and acidity—is
perfectly balanced in these wines, they can be otherworldly in their vibrancy and richness.
Often they must be aged for three to seven years before the counterpoint tastes
harmonious. Moelleux (pronounced moi-LE) Vouvrays are traditionally drunk with rich
dishes, especially those with complex sauces, or served as dessert wines. Finally, though
rarely, you may also come across an extremely sweet “Doux” Vouvray. With more than 45
grams per liter of residual sugar, these Vouvrays have mind-blowing opulence.
   Some of the vineyards and cellars of Vouvray almost defy existence. Vineyards cling to
the tops of cliffs, with cellars and houses below them, cut into the soft, tuffeau rock, a type
of limestone, that forms the face of the cliff. Many cellars were chiseled into the caves left
behind long ago, after the tuffeau was quarried for building materials for châteaux.
   As for Montlouis, as I mentioned, in general it tends to be softer and less dramatically
focused than Vouvray. That said, certain producers, such as Domaine Deletang, make
extraordinary Montlouis that is every bit the equal of Vouvray.
   In addition to Vouvray and Montlouis, the middle Loire is also home to simple whites
that can come from anywhere in the region. These can be made from a variety of grapes,
including chenin blanc, sauvignon blanc, and even a minority percentage of chardonnay.
The most popular of these wines is Touraine sauvignon, made from sauvignon blanc
grapes, which tastes like an extremely simple relative of Sancerre and makes for good
carafe wines.

     It would seem counterintuitive that a white wine could taste vibrant and
     luxurious after half a century, but the top Vouvrays can and do.
               THE WESTERN LOIRE: MUSCADET

The westernmost part of the Loire, hard up against the cold, wet Atlantic coast, is known
for one wine alone—Muscadet, the leading wine of the Loire by volume. A dry, lean,
fresh, stainless-steel-fermented white meant for drinking (not thinking), Muscadet’s claim
to fame has always been its easy partnership with seafood—especially homey French
classics like moules frites (a pot of mussels steamed in wine with a tangle of thin French
fries on top). It is made from the melon de Bourgogne grape, often referred to simply as
melon. The grape’s name refers to Burgundy (Bourgogne), not the Loire, thanks to an
especially destructive frost in 1709, which destroyed most of the Loire’s vineyards.
Afterward, Burgundian monks came to help replant, bringing with them a local, frost-
hearty Burgundy variety—melon de Bourgogne. Recent DNA analysis indicates the grape
is a cross of pinot blanc and gouais blanc. As of the early eighteenth century, the grape
was forbidden in Burgundy in favor of chardonnay, and today, melon is extinct there.
   The Muscadet area is a sea of vines, some 30,000 acres (12,100 hectares) of them,
spread over gently rolling terrain (the vineyards of Sancerre, by comparison, cover just
6,700 acres/2,700 hectares). Like an upside-down fan, the region spreads in a vast arc
west, south, east, and northeast of the city of Nantes. The soil here is highly variable, but
the best vineyards tend to be planted on mixtures of granite, gneiss, and/or schist. Within
this area is one important subzone: Muscadet de Sèvre-et-Maine, named for the small
Sèvre and Maine Rivers that flow through the district. Virtually all of the tastiest Muscadet
wines come from Muscadet de Sèvre-et-Maine, or from one of the three small areas
allowed to append their name to Muscadet de Sèvre-et-Maine: Gorges, Clisson, and Le
Pallet.
   The labels of most of the top Muscadets read sur lie, on the lees, meaning that the wine
was left in contact with the yeast lees for several months—theoretically until it was
bottled. A Muscadet made this way takes on extra flavor and a bit more “baby fat” on its
lean frame, plus, sometimes, a very slight refreshing spritzyness. The practice dates from
the beginning of the twentieth century, when producers would put aside an especially good
barrel of Muscadet for family celebrations. Over time, they noticed that the wine in this
barrel, known as the honeymoon barrel, got even better thanks to its longer contact with
the yeasts.
   Muscadet is made by six hundred growers, most of whom sell their wines to some forty
négociants, who blend and bottle the wines under their own labels. Many of these wines
are quite good as well as inexpensive. Should you ever encounter them, here are the
Muscadets to buy: Domaine de l’Ecu, Louis Métaireau, Chéreau-Carré, Château de la
Cassemichère, Domaine de la Grange, Domaine de la Pépière, Domaine Luneau-Papin,
and Château du Cléray.
Crates of older Muscadet in a cellar. Because of its high acidity, fine Muscadet can age amazingly well.


              WHEN YOU VISIT… THE LOIRE VALLEY
   THE LOIRE VALLEY can be reached in about two hours by car from Paris. The region
   (known as the garden of France) is beautiful, full of forests and fields, plus stunning
   châteaux.
   THE EASTERN PART OF THE LOIRE, around Sancerre, is known for its artisanal goat
   cheeses; the western part of the Loire, where Muscadet is made, is known for oysters
   and fish dishes.
   IN ANGIERS, do not miss a chance to visit Chenonceau, the most famous castle in
   France (in addition to Versailles), and site of the Apocalypse Tapestries, considered
   among the masterpieces of French art.
                              The Loire Wines to Know
I love wines that have precision and snap, wines that seem spring-loaded with freshness. That characteristic is a
calling card for the Loire, and in particular for the lively dramatic wines below. The Loire is a big region, of course,
but the through-line for the wines is a certain “thirst-quenchingness”—true of reds, as well as whites.

                                                     WHITES




                                             DOMAINE PELLÉ
                                       SANCERRE | LA CROIX AU GARDE
                                               100% sauvignon blanc
This is the Ingrid Bergman of Sancerres—ravishing, polished, and effortlessly elegant. In great years, besides
having perfect tension between acidity and fruit, the wine has a unique kind of purity and clarity, with absolutely
vivid smoky/minerally flavors. Henry Pellé himself was considered one of the legendary masters of the sauvignon
blanc grape, and now his family carries on, making wines that are widely admired. The Pellé estate is perhaps best
known for its extraordinary, rich, dramatic Menetou-Salon, which is also where the estate is located.




                                         MATTHIAS ET EMILE ROBLIN

                                            SANCERRE | AMMONITES
                                               100% sauvignon blanc
I could not write notes fast enough when I tasted the Matthias and Emile Roblin wines—creamy yet tight; spicy yet
herbal; peppery yet salty; turbulant yet refined; flashy and focused, with not a whit of fat on their bones. Best of all,
the wines were evocative of the ocean—with rolling waves of seawater-like, briny flavors. Among the slew of
terrific wines they make, this one, named Ammonites for the large seashell fossils in the vineyard, is most
memorable.
                                     DOMAINE PRIEUR PIERRE ET FILS

                                          SANCERRE | LES COINCHES
                                               100% sauvignon blanc
Whenever I taste this wine, I feel like someone has just slammed a door made of chalk and flint, and molecules of
aroma and flavor are flying in all directions. Vivid, sharp, starched, and mouth-filling, yet all the while, lacy, it’s
Sancerre to the core. Domaine Prieur Pierre et Fils—a 42-acre (17-hectare) estate dominated by caillottes and silex
—is run by brothers Bruno and Thierry Prieur. The vines are planted on a hillside so steep, a winch is needed to
harvest the grapes. Les Coinches is a corner of sorts, where rows of vines meet.




                                               DOMAINE LAPORTE

                                            SANCERRE | LE ROCHOY
                                               100% sauvignon blanc
Nothing soft or mellow going on here. Domaine Laporte’s Le Rochoy is a firecracker of a Sancerre. Spicy, edgy,
zingy, and smelling like you just put your nose into a dynamited cliff (or perhaps smelled the barrel of a gun), it’s
invariably loaded with all the wild, tangy, flinty flavors hard-core sauvignon blanc drinkers love. Not for the timid.
Le Rochoy, a single vineyard owned by the Laporte family, is one of the vineyards closest to the Loire River.
                                        LOUIS-BENJAMIN DAGUENEAU

                                              POUILLY-FUMÉ | SILEX
                                               100% sauvignon blanc
The late Didier Dagueneau was considered both a renegade and a genius in the Loire. In the 1990s and 2000s,
Dagueneau, an ex–motorcycle racer with no formal winemaking training, upended conventional winemaking in
Pouilly-Fumé by, among other practices, severely reducing yields, allowing his grapes to get very ripe, and then
making several of his sauvignon blancs in oak. The results were racy, tightly wound, super-concentrated, expensive
sauvignon blancs that often took years of aging before the full extent of their flavors unfurled. The wines are now
being made by Dagueneau’s son, Louis-Benjamin (whose name is now the brand). Of the Dagueneau cuvées, the
one called Silex (flint) is my favorite—dramatically aromatic, thrillingly vibrant, and sophisticated, it has flavors so
alive the wine dances in your mouth. For pure, opulent hedonism, however, the Louis-Benjamin Dagueneau Pur
Sang (“Pure Blood”) has few competitors for its profoundly complex matrix of stone, saline, chalk, spice, and citrus
flavors.
                                     CLOS DE LA COULÉE DE SERRANT

                                                  SAVENNIÈRES
                                                100% chenin blanc
The most famous Savennières, Coulée de Serrant, is also one of the most famous white wines in the world. In great
years, it is chenin blanc from another galaxy. The wine can be so suffused with apple-caramel flavors, you feel as
though you’re inside a tarte tatin. The finesse, the nuance, the incisive focus, the gripping flavors that melt into a
silky, honeyed body—it’s all here in great years. The 17-acre (7-hectare) Coulée de Serrant vineyard is cared for by
the Joly family, the world’s leading proponents of the bio-dynamic approach to viticulture (see page 267).




                                          LE CLOS DE LA MESLERIE

                                                     VOUVRAY
                                                100% chenin blanc
In the first decade of the 2000s, expat American Peter Hahn restored by hand a rundown old stone house built in the
1600s, and the few hectares of clay-chalk vineyard surrounding it, naming the wine Le Clos de la Meslerie. Hahn’s
Vouvrays are massive, intense, very ripe, full-bodied wines, yet they manage to have an amazing tightness and
through-line of energy. And while energy may seem like an odd word, there’s no better term for their explosive
quince, citrus, honey cake, and minerally character.
                                       CHÂTEAU DE LA CASSEMICHÈRE

                      MUSCADET SÈVRE-ET-MAINE | CLOS DU BON CURÉ | SUR LIE
                                             100% melon de Bourgogne
From fifty-year-old vines comes this pretty, lacy, delicate Muscadet that’s gentle and fresh and makes you want to
drink a ton of it. When Muscadet is in top form, as this one is, it has a light minerality to it that’s thirst quenching.
The impressive castle of Château de la Cassemichère was built in the early 1700s. Alas, like many royals, the
family that owned the estate at the end of the 1700s, the Cottineaus, were beheaded during the French Revolution.

                                                        REDS
                                     DOMAINE DE LA PERRIÈRE
                                                        CHINON
                                                 100% cabernet franc
This serious Chinon, with its beautiful streak of spiciness, opened my mind about Chinon. When Chinon is very
good, as this is, it has a trim, fit body (it could be in a health club commercial), plus a pure, lively drive of freshness
more often associated with white wine than red. Best of all, great Chinon, such as Domaine de la Perrière’s, has an
almost miraculous structure—one senses the tannin from the cabernet franc—yet there’s no bitterness, dryness, or
raspyness. Just vivid, licoricey, violety fruit.




                                             CHÂTEAU DE LA GRILLE

                                                        CHINON
                                                 100% cabernet franc
Château de la Grille is one of the most masculine and muscular Chinons. It’s usually jet-black in color and bursting
with pent-up flavors evocative of licorice, violets, and something like café au lait. The way this wine unfurls itself
on the palate is especially captivating. Tightly wound at first, it unleashes itself in a whirlwind of moves, as though
it were, itself, a martial art. Built in the fifteenth century, the château grows only cabernet franc on its 69 acres (28
hectares) of land. Today owned by Baudry-Dutour, the estate’s reputation was firmly established by Albert Gosset,
of Champagne fame, who purchased it in 1951 and installed state-of-the-art equipment and updated the viticultural
practices.
Quite possibly the most beautiful wine region in France, Alsace has it all—gorgeous scenery, quaint villages and towns,
                           exquisite wines, and dozens upon dozens of toprated restaurants.
ALSACE

Alsace is one of the rare wine regions in the world devoted almost exclusively to white
wine. More than seven different varieties are common and, with few exceptions, they are
whites rarely made in other parts of France. Although by law (and in spirit), Alsace is a
French wine region, it has also at various times in its past belonged to Germany. Indeed,
within one seventy-five-year period in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the two
superpowers exchanged ownership of the region four times, for Alsace is one of Europe’s
strategic geopolitical crossroads.
   It is also a wine region so charming it may as well have emerged straight out of a fairy
tale. The vineyards are sun dappled, the half-timbered houses are cheerfully adorned with
flower boxes, the 119 villages—centuries old—are immaculate. All are set against the
grand backdrop of the Vosges Mountains. Perhaps it was all of this beauty that inspired the
Alsatian artist Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi; he sculpted the Statue of Liberty, a gift from
France to the United States.
   The most important grapes are the four white varieties: riesling, gewürztraminer, pinot
gris, and muscat. A fifth white, pinot blanc, is used to make basic quaffing wine. The lone
red grape, of which only a tiny amount is grown, is pinot noir. And interestingly, unlike
the practice in most of the rest of France, Alsace wines are labeled according to these
varieties, rather than by the place where the grapes grow.




   Founded in the 7th century, the village of Hunawhir (officially considered one of the “most beautiful villages of
  France”) is set among the vines. In the center is the 15th-century church of St Jacques le Majeur, named for one of
                                               Christ’s twelve apostles.
                             THE QUICK SIP ON ALSACE
         THE TOP WINES of Alsace are the dry, aromatic whites: riesling, gewürztraminer,
         muscat, and pinot gris.
         A SINGLE, PASSIONATE PHILOSOPHY pervades Alsace winemaking: to create wines
         with pure fruit flavors. New oak is almost never used.
         THANKS TO THE FAR NORTHERN but immensely sunny climate, Alsace wines are
         usually medium- to full-bodied. The best are concentrated wines, often with a dramatic
         streak of acidity.

   The great unsung heroes of France, Alsace whites are not the demure wines that you
might imagine. Nor do they usually taste sweet, a common misconception (unless, of
course, a sweet late-harvest wine is intentionally being made). The best among them are
powerful, bold, and dramatic. They virtually always taste dry. For some wines, a tiny
amount of residual sugar may be left in the wine, but this is balanced out—and, in effect,
negated—by a considerable amount of acidity. Moreover, they are made according to a
single, deeply held philosophy—namely, that great wine should be the purest possible
expression of two factors: the grapes it is made from and the ground it is grown in. An
Alsace winemaker’s goal is not to craft a wine with certain flavors, it’s to showcase the
inherent character of the grape itself when grown in a certain plot of earth. The emphasis
on the grape is so strong that blending is (almost) unthinkable. The most highly regarded
wines are almost always 100 percent of the variety named on the label.
   For wines to be truly expressive of grape and ground, the winemaking must be hands-
off. In Alsace, the top wines are fermented with indigenous yeasts instead of commercial
yeasts, and the wines are usually made in neutral containers—either stainless steel or
cement tanks, or older, inert casks called foudres. The lightning bolt of natural acidity in
the wines is rarely mollified by letting them go through malolactic fermentation, a process
that would soften the impression of acid. The combination of lively acidity, dryness, and
unhampered, uninhibited, unleashed fruit and minerality is what defines the great Alsace
wines and makes them some of the best all-around marriage partners for food.
   Besides dry table wines, two other categories of wine are made in Alsace: Vendange
tardive wines and wines known as sélection de grains nobles. Vendange tardive wines are
made from super-ripe, late-harvested grapes. Powerful and concentrated, VT wines, as
they are known, can taste slightly sweet. The second category, even more rare than VT, is
sélection de grains nobles (SGN). These are ravishingly unctuous wines made from super-
concentrated, late-harvested, botrytis-affected grapes. Curiously, the final taste impression
of both VT and SGN wines is not of sugariness but of hauntingly dense concentration.
   Finally, many of the top Alsace wine estates are family-owned firms. Some own all of
their own vineyards, others supplement their grapes with those bought from the region’s
4,600 small growers. As luck would have it, many wines that are exported from Alsace—
especially the rieslings and gewürztraminers—are of very high quality. This makes buying
them a pretty safe bet even if you don’t know the producer.
                                        TYPES OF WINE

Amazingly, most leading Alsace producers—even small producers—make twenty to thirty
different wines. The majority of these can be broken down into three types: regular,
reserve, and late harvest.
   The regular bottlings are the producer’s standard bread-and-butter wines. A typical
producer will make regular bottlings of all five leading grapes—riesling, gewürztraminer,
pinot gris, pinot blanc, and muscat.
   Next are the reserve bottlings. Although the word reserve might cause you to imagine a
single, special wine, in Alsace producers usually make multiple reserve wines. There can
be three reserve rieslings, four reserve gewürztraminers, and so on, all from the same
producer. Alas, reserve wines may be labeled in a number of ways. The label may carry
the name of a special, well-known vineyard, such as Zind Humbrecht’s Clos St.-Urbain.
Or, if the reserve wine happens to come from a Grand Cru vineyard (not all do), it may be
labeled with the words Grand Cru plus the name of the vineyard. And finally, a reserve
wine may be given a title such as réserve personelle or réserve exceptionnelle.




   A rocky outcrop of the Kitterle Vineyard, Domaines Schlumberger. The vineyard is nicknamed the “calf breaker,”
                               because its steep slopes can reach inclines of 50 degrees.

   The third type of wine—late-harvest wine—is made when the harvest permits. A
producer may make up to six of the rare specialties, vendange tardive and sélection de
grains nobles. They will be among the estate’s most precious and expensive offerings.
    On top of all this, just for the fun of it, many producers also make a pinot noir or a
sparkling wine or an inexpensive blended quaffing wine—or all three. It’s easy to see how
all these wines add up. From the perspective of an Alsace producer, more wines mean the
ability to show off how distinctly different the flavors derived from different sites can be.
                            CRÉMANT D’ALSACE

All of the sparkling wine made in Alsace is called Crémant d’Alsace, and like all
crémants, it is made in the same, painstaking way as Champagne. A blend of grapes is
used, including pinot blanc, Auxerrois, pinot noir, pinot gris, and/or chardonnay (which by
law is permitted only in Crémant d’Alsace; it cannot be made into a still table wine on its
own). All of the grapes used for Crémant d’Alsace are harvested earlier than grapes for
Alsace still wines, so that their acidity is pronounced. It’s this vivid acidity, of course, that
will give the final wine its snap, crackle, and pop.
   Crémant d’Alsace, which is an official appellation, accounts for more than 20 percent
of all Alsace wine. Indeed, thanks to its terrific quality and very affordable price, the
bubbly is getting more and more popular. In 1979, fewer than one million bottles of
Crémant d’Alsace were made. Today, that figure is more than 30 million bottles a year.
Try the ones from Pierre Sparr and Lucien Albrecht.
                  THE LAND AND THE VINEYARDS

Alsace lies about 300 miles (480 kilometers) due east of Paris. The vineyards run north to
south in one long, thin strip over the foothills along the eastern flank of the Vosges
Mountains. Germany’s Rhine River is about 12 miles (19 kilometers) to the east, and even
closer (about 6 miles/10 kilometers to the east) is Alsace’s river, Ill (pronounced EEL).
   After Champagne, this is France’s northernmost wine region, yet it is not generally
overcast and cool, as one might presume, but surprisingly sunny and dry. Thanks to the
protective mantle of the Vosges Mountains, less rain falls on the vineyards here than on
vineyards elsewhere in France.
    The best vineyards are south-facing for maximum sun, and most are located in the
southern part of the region, known as the Haut Rhine or upper Rhine. The growing season
is long, ensuring that even at this northern latitude, grapes growing in the best, sunniest
sites develop full physiological maturity.
   Soil in Alsace is varied enough to be a geologist’s dream. Wide variations in soil often
mean wide variations in the flavor and quality of the wines. And, in fact, there is an
enormous difference in flavor between an average wine from a nondescript vineyard and a
wine from an extraordinary vineyard, such as Trimbach’s Clos Ste.-Hune, which produces
one of the greatest rieslings in the world.

                  THE MOST IMPORTANT ALSACE WINES
                                    LEADING WINES
         GEWÜRZTRAMINER white (dry and sweet)
         MUSCAT white (dry and sweet)
         PINOT GRIS white (dry and sweet)
         RIESLING white (dry and sweet)

                                    WINES OF NOTE
         CRÉMANT D’ALSACE white (sparkling)
         PINOT BLANC white
         PINOT NOIR red

   The checkerboard of soil types in Alsace includes chalk combined with clay, limestone,
granite, schist, volcanic rock sediment, and sandstone. Alsace’s pinkish-colored sandstone,
called grès de Vosges, is a favorite building material for local cathedrals.
                                     THE GRAND CRU

In 1983, twenty-five of the very best vineyard sites in Alsace were, for the first time,
legally recognized as superior, and designated as Grand Cru. The act, however, was wildly
controversial. For two decades prior to this designation, Alsace producers and growers had
debated not only which vineyards were indeed the crème de la crème, but also what the
boundaries of those vineyards should be and what, if any, limits should be set on a Grand
Cru’s yield. Clearly, the stricter the requirements, the more impact and validity the
designation Alsace Grand Cru would have.

                          SURPRISING AGING POTENTIAL
    Only exceptional white grapes can be made into wines that will stand up to long aging—say, twenty years
    or more. Riesling is the world’s preeminent white grape in this regard, followed by (in no particular
    order) sémillon, pinot gris, gewürztraminer, and chardonnay from cold climates. In general, for a white
    wine to age, it must have an impeccable balance of fruit and alcohol, and it helps if the wine has high
    acidity. When made by the best producers, three of the most important Alsace whites—riesling,
    gewürztraminer, and pinot gris—all age remarkably well. Alsace rieslings, in particular, have an amazing
    ability to become graceful and honeyed the older they get.

   As it turned out, the standards set were not as stringent as many producers would have
liked. To add fuel to the fire, twenty-six more vineyards were later added to the original
twenty-five, bringing the total number of Grand Cru vineyards to fifty-one. That’s far too
many to suit a number of producers. Moreover, the yield set for Grand Cru vineyards 686
gallons per acre (65 hectoliters per hectare), is considered by many to be too high for the
production of great wine.
   On the other hand, just because the regulations could be stricter does not mean that no
great Grand Cru wines are being made. They are. In fact, most wines labeled Grand Cru
are far more intense, elegant, complex, and structured than the producers’ regular
bottlings. But, some top producers, as a quiet form of protest, refuse to use the term Grand
Cru even though they own Grand Cru vineyards. Instead, they call their best wines by a
vineyard name or a proprietary name. The producer Hugel simply uses the word Jubilee
(as in Hugel Riesling Jubilee) to designate wines that come from Grand Cru vineyards.
   By law, only wines made from four grape varieties are allowed to be called Grand Cru,
and they are the varieties that, over many decades, producers have deemed capable of
greatness: riesling, gewürztraminer, pinot gris, and muscat. If a producer chooses to label
his wine Grand Cru, the label must also state the specific Grand Cru vineyard from which
the wine came. Grand Cru wines are several times more expensive than regular bottlings,
and production of them is small. Indeed, only 4 percent of the total production of Alsace
wines are Grands Crus.
       “True quality is that which succeeds in surprising and moving us. It is not
       locked inside a formula. Its essence is subtle (subjective) and never rational. It
       resides in the unique, the singular, but it is ultimately connected to something
       more universal. A great wine is one in which quality is contained. Such a wine
       will necessarily be uncommon and decidedly unique because it cannot be like
       any other, and because of this fact it will be atypical, or only typical of itself.”
                                                                 — ANDRÉ OSTERTAG,
                                     winemaker, as quoted in Kermit Lynch’s Inspiring Thirst




Half-timbered houses are one of Alsace’s architectural signatures. Here, houses in Colmar, the “capital” of Alsace wine
                                                        country.


                          THEY BRING BABIES, DON’T THEY?
     In Alsace, everyone looks up. Not only because they’re admiring the architecture, but also because
     they’re hoping to spot a white stork—or a whole nest of them. The animal best known as a baby-delivery
     agent is, in fact, the official bird of Alsace. Indeed, the species was in rapid decline until Alsace’s activists
     initiated successful repopulation efforts. The bird itself has enchanted humans for centuries. Storks are
     referenced in everything from Egyptian hieroglyphics to Greek mythology. To this day, they symbolize
     good luck and fertility. Their posture and size are quite striking in flight, so have your camera ready.
              THE GRAPES AND WINES OF ALSACE

Alsace wines are based on and named after the grapes from which they’ve come. Here are
the main wines.

RIESLING
Riesling is Alsace’s most prestigious grape, although the wine made from it is as
thoroughly different from German riesling as a wine can be and still come from the same
grape—and grown virtually next door to boot! The best German rieslings are fruity, finely
etched, exquisitely nuanced wines, low in alcohol, vibrating with acidity, and usually
balanced with a softening pinch of sweetness.
    Alsace rieslings are not nearly as dainty. These are mostly very dry, broad wines with
palate-coating flavors that lean toward gunflint, steel, and minerals, with a limey sort of
citrus. Tight and austere when young, the wines begin to come around after two to three
years. With a decade or more of age, they take on a richness, as well as a viscosity, that
can be stunning.
    Riesling is known to be a grape sensitive to its terroir, and this is as true in Alsace as it
is elsewhere. Grown in a merely decent vineyard, it makes merely okay wine.
Extraordinary riesling requires near-perfect vineyard conditions.
   No discussion of great Alsace riesling could fail to include Trimbach’s Clos Ste.-Hune
and Cuvée Frédéric Emile; as well as Domaine Zind Humbrecht’s Clos Saint Urbain
Rangen de Thann; Domaine Weinbach’s Cuvée Ste.-Cathérine; Domaine Ostertag’s
Fronholz; and Domaine Marcel Deiss’s Altenberg de Bergheim.
                                THE GRAPES OF ALSACE
                                               WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: Legally permitted to be used only in the sparkling wine Crémant d’Alsace, where it adds
 finesse and body.
 GEWÜRZTRAMINER: A major grape. Makes flamboyant, dry wines full of personality, plus extraordinary
 late-harvest wines.
 MUSCAT: Two types grow in Alsace, muscat blanc à petits grains and muscat ottonel. These are often
 blended to make stunningly aromatic wines usually drunk as aperitifs.
 PINOT BLANC: Makes medium-bodied quaffing wines of good, not usually great, character. Also known
 as klevner.
 PINOT GRIS: A major grape. The source of unique, full-bodied wines, totally unlike pinot gris planted
 elsewhere in the world. Very old vintages may carry pinot gris’s former name, tokay or tokay-pinot gris.
 RIESLING: A major grape and the most prestigious one. Alsace rieslings can have remarkable
 complexity and aging potential. Also used for late-harvest wines.
 SYLVANER: A minor grape. Can make very good wines in Alsace, especially when the sylvaner vines
 are old. The same as the grape silvaner in Germany.

                                                  RED
 PINOT NOIR: A minor grape, but noteworthy because it is Alsace’s only red. Occasionally makes
 fascinating wine.


GEWÜRZTRAMINER
It’s often said that gewürztraminer (or, gewurztraminer without the umlaut, as you’ll
almost always see it, this being France) is something you either really like or really don’t.
I suspect that the people who “really don’t” have never had a Grand Cru gewürztraminer
from Alsace. In fact, gewürztraminer (like nebbiolo) is one of the grapes that simply
doesn’t travel well. Virtually all of the great ones—the ones with gripping flavors, finesse,
and complexity—come from Alsace (the gewürztraminers from Italy’s Trentino-Alto
Adige region are their only competitors).
    The aromas and flavors are extroverted. Lychees, gingerbread, vanilla, fruit-cocktail
syrup, grapefruit, smoke, spice, stones, minerals, honeysuckle, and a wonderful
bittersweet character rather like marmalade, do not simply rest in the glass—they rage
about in it. Such massive fruitiness is sometimes mistaken for sweetness, but as already
noted, most Alsace gewürztraminers are dry or nearly so (unless a late-harvest wine, a
vendange tardive, is being made).
   To go along with their big 3-D fruit, Alsace gewürztraminers have an enormous body
and low natural acidity. The existing acidity therefore must be carefully protected by the
winemaker. With age, Alsace gewürztraminer seems—if this is possible—even bigger-
flavored. Made as a vendange tardive, it can be a knockout.
   The grape gewürztraminer is a rose-colored mutation—that is, a clone—of the ancient
grape savagnin, which originated centuries ago somewhere in what is today the area of
northeastern France and southwestern Germany.
   Many Alsace producers make excellent gewürztraminers. Some of my favorites:
Domaines Schlumberger Kessler Grand Cru; Kuentz-Bas Pfersigberg Grand Cru;
Domaine Zind Humbrecht Goldert Grand Cru; Domaine Weinbach Altenberg Grand Cru
Cuvée Laurence; Hugel et Fils Hommage à Jean Hugel; and Domaine Marcel Deiss
Altenberg Grand Cru.

PINOT GRIS
Riesling may be the most prestigious grape in Alsace, but pinot gris is the well-loved
hometown girl. The variety is, technically speaking, not a variety, but a clone of pinot noir,
and originated in Burgundy. Indeed, in Alsace, pinot gris has such depth and richness it’s
reminiscent of white Burgundy. What it is generally not like, however, is pinot gris from
Italy (pinot grigio) or from Oregon. Both of those are usually lighter in body and
somewhat more subtle in flavor. Alsace pinot gris, on the other hand, is a high-impact
wine, with a full body and bold, concentrated flavors of bitter almonds, peach, ginger,
smoke, vanilla, and earth.

                                 ASPARAGUS, MEET WINE
    If opening a restaurant for just three months a year seems crazy, consider a three-month-only restaurant
    that also serves only one food. In Alsace, from April until June, small restaurants dedicated to asparagus
    alone open their doors. Every single dish on the menu will be composed of the fat, juicy spears.
    Asparagus aficionados believe there to be only one perfect wine accompaniment: dry muscat. Indeed,
    after a long winter, the most sensational way to celebrate the arrival of spring is with a huge platter of
    asparagus drizzled with hollandaise sauce, and a cold bottle of a great Alsace muscat like Domaine Zind
    Humbrecht Goldert Grand Cru.

   Among the great pinot gris are those from Kuentz-Bas, Léon Beyer, Domaine Marcel
Deiss, Domaine Ernest Burn (especially the Clos St.-Imer), and Zind Humbrecht. Pinot
gris is often made into lush vendange tardive wines.

MUSCAT
Grapes with the word muscat in the name have been grown around the Mediterranean (and
indeed, around the world) for centuries, and represent many different varieties, only some
of which are related.
    In Alsace, two types of muscat are grown, then blended. Muscat blanc à petits grains
(literally, “white muscat with the small berries”), with its outrageously floral and citrus
flavors, is considered the best of the named muscats. The other muscat, muscat ottonel, is
more delicate, earlier ripening (an advantage in a northern climate), and has lower acidity.
But muscat ottonel (a cross of chasselas and another cross called muscat d’Eistenstadt) is
somewhat rare, since it can have problems with coulure (a condition whereby the buds
lose their flowers before those flowers can be fertilized to become grapes).
   Alsace is one of the few places where muscat is made in a dry style. Indeed, Alsace
muscat is a bone-dry, dramatically aromatic wine redolent of peaches, orange peel,
tangerine, and musk. It is one of the world’s most evocative aperitifs.
   The muscats to search out? Those from Domaine Albert Boxler, Domaine Ernest Burn,
Léon Beyer, Domaine Ostertag, and Zind Humbrecht.

PINOT BLANC
Just like pinot gris, pinot blanc is, genetically speaking, a clone of pinot noir. Alsace’s
pinot blanc (also known as klevner) is easy to like, dependable, and safe. It’s never as
thrilling as riesling, as dramatic as gewürztraminer, or as novel as pinot gris; nonetheless,
the top Alsace pinot blancs are tasty wines with baked-apple flavors and a light texture.
Unfortunately, there are also many bland versions.
   Historically, some older pinot blanc vineyards also contained a small percentage of
vines later identified as the Burgundian white grape Auxerrois. Thus, some Alsace pinot
blancs may be, technically speaking, field blends. Top producers of pinot blanc include
Domaine Albert Boxler, Josmeyer, and Domaine Weinbach.

PINOT NOIR
The only red wine made in Alsace is pinot noir. In the past, the quality was so variable that
much of it ended up looking like rosé. Then, in the 1990s, a few of the top wineries began
rethinking their approach, planting pinot noir in better sites, lowering the yields, using
better equipment and aging the wine in new barrels. As expected, the wine got better. A lot
better. In good vintages Marcel Deiss’s Bergheim Burlenberg pinot noir, Ostertag’s
Fronholz pinot noir, and Hugel’s Jubilee pinot noir show earthy, complex, almost
Burgundy-like flavors.
   Like all other Alsace wines, pinot noir must, by law, be bottled in tall, Germanic flute
bottles. Because it’s surprising, if not a little unnerving, to see red wine flow from what
looks like a bottle of riesling, several producers are battling the bottle law, in hopes of
having the rule changed.

VENDANGE TARDIVE AND SÉLECTION DE GRAINS NOBLES
Two sensational types of late-harvest wines, vendange tardive (VT) and sélection de
grains nobles (SGN), can be made only in certain favorable years (sometimes only once or
twice a decade) and even then they generally make up less than 1 percent of the region’s
production.
   But sensational isn’t nearly adequate as an adjective. These wines can be astonishing in
the depth and vividness of their flavors. By law, only the four grape varieties allowed for
Grand Cru wines may be used: riesling, gewürztraminer, pinot gris, and muscat. By the
time they are picked, the grapes for VT wines may be (but don’t have to be) infected with
Botrytis cinerea, the noble rot responsible for Sauternes.
                The rolling vineyards of Alsace lie over the foothills of the Vosges Mountains.

   Vendange tardive wines are not exactly dessert wines but, rather, wines of such
profound concentration that they seem to have atomic density. Lush but underscored by
exuberant acidity, they may be a touch sweet or dry. (Unfortunately, there’s no way to tell
from the label.) VTs are so spellbinding, they are generally drunk by themselves or with
something utterly simple. (I always skip the pie, and drink one as the finale to
Thanksgiving dinner.)
   Sélections de grains nobles are late-harvested wines that are always sweet and always
infected with botrytis. To say that the wines are sweet, however, is an understatement.
SGN wines can make Sauternes seem shy. Wines of ravishing unctuousness, SGNs are
balanced by such soaring acidity, profound alcohol, and huge extract that they actually
finish in a way that is exquisitely balanced.
   Because a significant amount of botrytis does not appear in Alsace vineyards every
year (or even very easily in any year), the production of SGNs can range from nothing to a
barely commercial amount.
   A producer’s VTs and SGNs will often come from the same vineyard, usually one of
the best. First, the pickers will go through the vineyard choosing, berry by berry, only the
botrytis-infected grapes for SGN. Then, they’ll go back and pick the remaining super-ripe
grapes for VT.
   VT and SGN wines are governed by extremely strict regulations. Producers must
officially declare their intentions to produce them; the grapes must be handpicked and
analyzed as they are being pressed. The wines cannot be chaptalized. Once they are made,
they are subjected to a taste test before they can be sold. In some years, up to 35 percent of
the wines fail to pass the test! VT and SGN wines are expensive, but they are unequaled in
the world. Do not miss a VT or SGN from any of the following producers: Léon Beyer,
Domaine Albert Boxler, Domaine Marcel Deiss, Hugel et Fils, Kuentz-Bas, Trimbach,
Domaines Schlumberger, Domaine Weinbach, or Domaine Zind Humbrecht.
                          THE FOODS OF ALSACE

After a few days in Alsace, even the most insatiable food and wine lover is ready to beg
for mercy. The sheer number of delicious regional dishes is daunting, and the number of
great restaurants—both humble and grand—is second only to that of Paris.
   Kugelhopf is a good example of the irresistibility of Alsace specialties. These mildly
sweet, turban-shaped rolls, rich with eggs and butter, are dusted with sugar or flecked with
walnut pieces and sometimes diced bacon. In every bakery, they line the shelves like
perfect soldiers, along with pains paysans, golden, crusty loaves studded with raisins and
almonds, and petits pains au lait, soft, doughy milk rolls.
    Alsace’s most stunning “bread,” however, is flammekueche, also known as tarte
flambée—best described as pizza meets the onion tart. First, a thin layer of bread dough is
stretched across a chopping board; it’s then smeared with fromage blanc (a fresh white
cheese) and heavy cream. Next it’s topped with smoked bacon and onions, and finally it’s
baked in a fiery, wood-burning oven until blistered. In winstubs (“wine bars”) all over
Alsace, flammekuechen can’t be baked fast enough for the hoardes of happy families and
friends who come to share it.
   Since roughly the tenth century, Alsace has been the capital of Munster, a creamy,
pungent cheese. Almost as important as driving along the Route du Vin is driving along a
smaller side road, the so-called Route du Fromage (cheese route), where country
restaurants offer homemade Munster, baked with potatoes and onions and served with
bacon and ham.
   With due respect to the Romans, who fattened snails on choice tidbits and housed them
in special snail boxes, the French, and especially the Alsatians, have raised the eating of
escargots to a fine art. Drizzling snails with garlic butter is merely the tip of the iceberg.
There are dozens of ways of preparing snails, including a famous one in which the
mollusks are simmered with wild chanterelle mushrooms, garlic, and shallots in a wine
and whipped cream stock, then served with a chilled riesling.
                   WHITE WINE AND THE OTHER WHITE MEAT
 Among all the world’s rieslings, pinot gris, and gewürtztra-miners, those of Alsace are usually the most
 full-bodied and concentrated. This makes them great choices when you’re having meat but want to drink
 a white wine. Which is what happens in Alsace all the time. The region’s robust, down-to-earth, cold-
 weather food revolves around pork and game that are often cooked with hearty vegetables, such as
 potatoes, onions, and cabbage. The region’s specialty, choucroute garni, a dish of sauerkraut, pork,
 sausages, bacon, and potatoes, is stellar with riesling. But choucroute aside, even a simple pork roast is
 raised to new heights when it’s served with a powerfully fruit-packed, crisp Alsace riesling.




 An irresistible kugelhopf, rich with eggs and butter, and dusted lightly with sugar. Alsace is for those with insatiable
                                                        appetites.

  In Alsace, April is not the cruelest month; it is the time for unrestrained asparagus
madness. The vegetable inspires such devotion that there are restaurants open only from
mid-April until the end of June that serve nothing but asparagus and dry muscat (see
Asparagus, Meet Wine, page 286).
   Alsace is one of the two capitals of foie gras (the other is southwestern France). While
many animal activists would see the food universally banned, it is still allowed here, and
many consider it one of the treasures of French gastronomy. Geese are force-fattened until
their livers are large and rich. The livers are then seasoned with salt, pepper, and a touch
of Cognac and coddled in a bain-marie. In pâté de foie gras, the liver is flecked with
truffles and wrapped in a rich pastry crust, then cooked. But Alsatian chefs also stuff game
birds with it, sauté it in gewürztraminer, and even top plebeian sauerkraut with it.
   Speaking of cabbage, although its exact origins are not known, choucroute is so
undeniably Alsatian that locals are often referred to as choucroute-eaters by the rest of
France. Choucroute is prepared by shredding young white cabbage and layering it with
salt in large crocks until it ferments. The fermented cabbage is then cooked in wine—
usually a riesling—and served with a stunning array of potatoes, several cuts of pork,
sausages, and if the choucroute is fancy, suckling pig.
   Given the heartiness of Alsace cooking, it might seem as though only the lightest of
sorbets should be in order for dessert. Fat chance. Dense, creamy cheesecakes are
common, as are apple tarts, plum pies, and soufflés made with the local kirsch (cherry
brandy). One thing never shows up with dessert, however. That is a vendange tardive or
sélection de grains nobles. These rare, late-harvest wines are so extraordinary and
complex that dessert only seems to get in the way.

                            WHEN YOU VISIT… ALSACE
         THE BEST WAY TO VISIT the wineries of Alsace is to follow the wine route of Alsace,
         which winds for 75 miles (120 kilometers) along the eastern side of the Vosges
         Mountains, over the vineyard-covered hillsides, and along the floors of deep valleys.
         The close-to-poetic atmosphere includes charming old-world towns with bell towers and
         ramparts, storybook inns, and lovely churches. Castles overlook the plain, paths run
         through the vineyards, and everywhere, wine taverns and cellars invite you to drop in
         on the spur of the moment.
         IN THE HEART OF THE VINEYARDS, a few miles/kilometers from Colmar, is the
         Kintzheim castle, headquarters of the fascinating Alsace Wine Museum and the
         Confrérie Saint-Etienne, a society dating from the 1400s, which now acts as a
         promotional organization, hosting, among other events, some of the most lavish
         banquets in France.
                            The Alsace Wines to Know
It’s almost impossible to go wrong drinking Alsace wine. The quality of the wines is so high and the deliciousness
factor so great that you are virtually guaranteed to be happy, impressed (and sometimes blown away). Unlike
Burgundy, in Alsace, the Grand Cru wines are often not stratospherically more expensive than regular bottling… a
reason to indulge.

                                                 SPARKLING
                                           LUCIEN ALBRECHT
                                      CRÉMANT D’ALSACE | BRUT ROSÉ
                                                  100% pinot noir
One of the best-known producers of Crémant d’Alsace, the family-owned firm of Lucien Albrecht was founded in
1425. The winery’s blanc de blancs is widely known, and deservedly so. But it’s this rare rosé—made entirely from
pinot noir—that’s extra special. Beautifully made according to the traditional (Champagne) method, the wine is a
slice of cold, spiced-strawberry freshness.




                                                    WHITES
                                     DOMAINE MARCEL DEISS
                          RIESLING | ALTENBERG DE BERGHEIM | GRAND CRU
                                                    100% riesling
All of the best Alsace rieslings have lift. They are like Gothic arches, soaring in their elegance, never heavy, never
weighted down. Marcel Deiss’s rieslings are a prime example. These are wines of impeccable elegance. In the best
years, they are thoroughly concentrated with fruit but so carefully balanced by a tightrope of acidity that the overall
impression is not of fruit or acid, but simply of beauty and delicacy.
                                              DOMAINE OSTERTAG

                                              RIESLING | FRONHOLZ
                                                    100% riesling
The wines of André Ostertag have a cult following for their distinctive, mesmerizing character and for the flavors
that ignite like sparks against your palate. The riesling from the vineyard known as Fronholz is amazing, with
thrusts of minerals, cool jets of citrus, damp swaths of earthiness, and an almost levitating sense of spiciness. After
tasting this wine, I usually can’t get the memory out of my head for hours.




                                              DOMAINE WEINBACH

                                       PINOT GRIS | CUVÉE LAURENCE
                                                   100% pinot gris
Built in the early eighteenth century as a Capucin monastery, Domaine Weinbach is now owned and run by two
women, Madame Colette Faller and her daughter, Catherine, who is in charge of marketing. (In 2014, daughter
Laurence—for decades the estate’s winemaker—died unexpectedly at an early age.) The wines from this estate are
among the most expressive, powerful, and elegant in all of Alsace. They have a purity to them that can seem
absolutely regal. The domaine’s pinot gris Cuvée Laurence is a stunning example. Rich, minerally, spicy, creamy,
and utterly dense with flavor, it is nonetheless a wine with a long, refined finish. The Cuvée Laurence
gewürztraminer from the estate’s best gewürztraminer vineyards is also mind-bending in concentration.




                                         DOMAINE ZIND HUMBRECHT

                               GEWÜRZTRAMINER | GOLDERT | GRAND CRU
                                               100% gewürztraminer
From the Grand Cru vineyard Goldert comes this richly dense and opulent, yet refined and intriguing,
gewürztraminer, evocative of tropical fruits fused with roses and exotic spices. Few white grapes are more
expressive and powerful than gewürztraminer, and gewürztraminer is nowhere more expressive or powerful than in
Alsace, especially from a top Grand Cru vineyard such as Goldert. This wine has it all. But then, virtually all Zind
Humbrecht wines are massively lush and fleshy, with bold, extroverted flavors. Not for the faint of heart.




                                                   KUENTZ-BAS

                            GEWÜRZTRAMINER | PFERSIGBERG | GRAND CRU
                                               100% gewürztraminer
Kuentz-Bas makes some of the most stunning gewürztraminers in the world. This one, from the Grand Cru
vineyard Pfersigberg (“hill of peach trees”), is so taut, hard, and sleek, the sensation is akin to running your hand
over the biceps of a bodybuilder. In great years, the creamy, spicy flavors are massively concentrated, and yet the
wine is also ravishingly elegant. The aroma is so heady, you’d swear you’re lying in a bed of acacia and
honeysuckle blossoms.
                                                  TRIMBACH

                                   RIESLING | CUVÉE FRÉDÉRIC EMILE
                                                  100% riesling
A family-owned estate, Trimbach makes scrumptious gewürztraminer and pinot gris, but their rieslings can be
simply devastating in their elegance and concentration. The Cuvée Frédéric Emile, named after an ancestor, comes
from old vines in two Grand Cru vineyards: Osterberg and Geisberg. The aroma is quintessentially riesling—like
cold stone that has been rubbed with peaches and apricots—and the vivid acidity is almost crunchy.




                                            SWEET WINES
                                       DOMAINE WEINBACH
                         PINOT GRIS | ALTENBOURG | VENDANGES TARDIVES
                                                 100% pinot gris
One of the best wineries in Alsace, Domaine Weinbach is an extraordinary producer of VTs and SGNs. This is the
domaine’s least expensive (though still pricey) vendange tardive, yet it is a masterpiece. Sensationally pure and
deep aromas and flavors of orange marmalade and dried peaches predominate. The texture is like cool silk, though
the body is opulent. Although sweet, the wine does not come off sugary but has a refinement that is both beautiful
and memorable.
                                        DOMAINES SCHLUMBERGER

                GEWÜRZTRAMINER | CUVÉE ANNE | SÉLECTION DE GRAINS NOBLES
                                             100% gewürztraminer
The largest of the top producers, Domaines Schlumberger has 350 contiguous acres (140 hectares), half of which
are classified Grand Cru. The rieslings from this family-owned estate are delicious, but the gewürztraminers truly
leave you dazzled. Cuvée Anne, a rare, late-harvest gewürztraminer SGN, is produced on average only twice a
decade. The wine is so opulent and powerful it tastes as though every molecule of water has been siphoned out of it,
leaving only the utter essence of fruit. The flavors and aromas zigzag among ginger, apricots, and wet granite, with
flying sparks of acidity.
Harvesting grapes in the Languedoc-Roussillon, the large, strikingly beautiful swath of land in southern France, along
                                                the Mediterranean.
LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON

Spread over an immense crescent of land along the Mediterranean coast from Spain in the
west to Provence in the east, the Languedoc-Roussillon is, in many ways, France’s best-
kept secret. Despite its considerable size (700,000 acres/283,000 hectares), historical
importance, and innovative winemaking, the region is still relatively unknown in the New
World. Yet, a century ago, almost half of all French wine was made in this one place.
Today about 25 percent still is.
   The wines of the Languedoc-Roussillon cover a broad spectrum, from white to red, dry
to sweet, still to sparkling, and even fortified (the famous fortified wine Banyuls is made
here). But the region’s best wines are its reds, which possess a rustic, juicy,
earthy/minerally/fruity “south of France flavor” that’s irresistible.

      The Languedoc-Roussillon is sometimes called le Midi, loosely translated as
      “the land of the midday sun.”

   During the Middle Ages, when most vineyards here were in the care of monks, the
wines were prized. In the fourteenth century, wines from certain parts of the Languedoc-
Roussillon were so famous that the hospitals of Paris prescribed them for their healing
powers. But for most of the twentieth century, the Languedoc (as it is often simply called)
produced mostly the sort of no-name, no-frills vin ordinaire that was bought in bulk and
cost less than water. (During the world wars, the ration of wine given daily to French
soldiers usually came from here.) In fairness, there were small enclaves where making fine
wine had always been important, but they were just that—small enclaves.

             THE QUICK SIP ON LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON
         THE WINES of Languedoc-Roussillon are the quintessential wines of southern France
         and represent the most exciting, best-value French wines.
         THE LANGUEDOC is the largest wine-producing region in France. More wine is
         produced in this one area than in the entire United States.
         DOZENS OF GRAPE VARIETIES are grown, from carignan, mourvèdre, and grenache
         (all of which originated next door in Spain), to French varieties such as syrah, cabernet
         sauvignon, and chardonnay.

   A transformation began in the 1980s, as the Languedoc became an insider’s paradise
for bargain hunters seeking easy-to-drink French wines that go well with Mediterranean
foods. The transformation was initiated at all levels of the industry, from small producers
like Borie de Maurel, Domaine de Villemajou, Domaine de l’Hortus, Gilbert Alquier,
Domaine de l’Arjolle, and Mas de Daumas Gassac; to large companies, such as Fortant de
France; and to very large (27 million gallons/102 million liters of wine a year!), quality-
oriented cooperatives, such as Val d’Orbieu/UCCOAR.
The Languedoc-Roussillon is bordered and sheltered by mountains on two sides—the rugged Pyrenées to the southwest,
                       and the Cévennes Mountains part of the Massif Central, in the north.

   Languedoc-Roussillon reds are often blends based on several of the same traditional
grapes used in the southern Rhône Valley: syrah, mourvèdre, grenache, and carignan.
(Interestingly, the latter three are all Spanish in origin, and were brought from Spain over
the Pyrenees and into the Roussillon part of the Languedoc-Roussillon.) These red wines
are known, as are most wines in France, by their appellations—Corbières, Faugères, St.-
Chinian, and so on. However, the Languedoc is also one of the few regions in France
where wines can be named after a grape variety. More on this in a moment, in The
Categories of Languedoc-Roussillon Wine, page 297.

                                        THE LAND OF YES
     The Languedoc region is named after a group of languages and dialects spoken in southern France
     during the Middle Ages, known collectively as the langue d’oc, or “language of oc,” oc being the word
     for “yes” in the Occitan language of southern France. In the north of France, the word for “yes” was oïl,
     which later evolved to oui.
         THE MOST IMPORTANT LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON
                          WINES
              LEADING APPELLATION-DESIGNATED WINES
         BANYULS red (fortified; sweet)
         CORBIÈRES red
         CÔTES DU ROUSSILLON VILLAGES red
         FAUGÈRES red
         LA CLAPE red
         LANGUEDOC white, rosé, red
         MINERVOIS red
         MONTPEYROUX red
         MUSCAT DE FRONTIGNAN white (fortified; sweet)
         MUSCAT DE RIVESALTES white (fortified; sweet)
         MUSCAT DE ST.-JEAN-DE-MINERVOIS white (fortified; sweet)
         PIC SAINT LOUP red
         PICPOUL DE PINET white
         QUATOURZE red
         ST.-CHINIAN red
         ST.-SATURNIN red
         TERRASSES DU LARZAC red

              LEADING VARIETALLY DESIGNATED WINES—
                          PAYS D’OC IGP
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MERLOT red
         PINOT NOIR red
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white
         SYRAH red
         VIOGNIER white

                              APPELLATIONS OF NOTE
         BLANQUETTE DE LIMOUX white (sparkling)
         COLLIOURE red
         CÔTES DU ROUSSILLON red
         CRÉMANT DE LIMOUX white (sparkling)
         FITOU red

  The Languedoc and Roussillon were two separate provinces for most of history. The
Languedoc became part of France in the late thirteenth century, but Roussillon belonged to
Spain until the mid-seventeenth century. Nonetheless, the regions have always been
entwined culturally and financially; they were finally joined administratively in the late
1980s. Today, while the province is French, threads of Spanish culture (such as the local
passion for bullfighting) are still evident.
   Like Provence and the southern Rhône, the Languedoc is warm, arid, and so
luminously full of light it can seem as though the sky itself is somehow bigger there.
Compared to the vineyards of northern France, it is an easy place in which to grow grapes.
The landscape is dominated by the scratchy patchwork of low bushes, resinous plants, and
wild herbs known as garigue. Indeed, the wines themselves are often described as exuding
garigue, a heady commingled aroma of wild, resinous thyme, rosemary, and lavender,
intermixed with scrub brush and broom.
               THE GRAPES OF LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON
                                              WHITES
BOURBOULENC, CLAIRETTE, GRENACHE BLANC, PICPOUL, MARSANNE, MACCABEU, ROLLE
(VERMENTINO), AND ROUSSANNE: Used in numerous traditional white wines throughout the region.
When yields are low and winemaking is skillful, blends of these grapes can be delicious.
CHARDONNAY: Major grape for international-style Vin de Pays d’Oc. Also used in the traditional
sparkling wine Crémant de Limoux, and in the still wine Limoux.
CHENIN BLANC: Minor grape used primarily in the traditional sparkling wine Crémant de Limoux.
MAUZAC: Native Languedoc grape used mainly in the sparkling wines Blanquette de Limoux and
Crémant de Limoux.
MUSCAT BLANC À PETITS GRAINS: Considered the greatest of the muscat grapes in terms of quality.
Used to make the sweet fortified wines Muscat de Frontignan and Muscat de St.-Jean-de-Minervois.
MUSCAT OF ALEXANDRIA: One of the dozens of grapes with muscat in the name. Considered less
prestigious than muscat blanc à petits grains. Used to make the popular sweet fortified wine Muscat de
Rivesaltes, among others.
SAUVIGNON BLANC: Used for international-style Vin de Pays d’Oc.
VIOGNIER: Major grape. Source of some of the best white Vin de Pays d’Oc.

                                                REDS
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Major grape. Used for high-quality Vin de Pays d’Oc.
CARIGNAN: Historically a major grape, but declining in importance. Used in small amounts in numerous
traditional red wines, including Corbières, Faugères, Minervois, and others. Although widely grown in the
Languedoc-Roussillon, the grape originated in Spain, where it is referred to as mazuelo and cariñena.
CÔT (MALBEC), LLADONER PELUT, PICPOUL NOIR, AND TERRET NOIR: Minor grapes. Used in
small amounts in traditional reds and rosés, although plantings are mostly on the decline.
CINSAUT: Workhorse grape used in inexpensive traditional red table wines and rosés.
GRENACHE: Major grape. Used for blending in traditional dry red wines, but also famous as the
principal grape in the renowned, sweet fortified red wine Banyuls. Known in Spain, its original home, as
garnacha.
MERLOT: Major grape for international-style Vin de Pays d’Oc.
MOURVÈDRE: Major grape. Used in numerous traditional red wines, including Corbières, Faugères,
Fitou, Minervois, and others. Like grenache and carignan, Spanish in origin (referred to in Spain as
monastrell).
SYRAH: Major grape. Used in numerous modern and traditional red wines, including those of Corbières,
Faugères, Minervois, and others.
A masterpiece of ancient Roman architecture, the Pont du Gard was built halfway through the 1st century A.D. It is the
    principal construction in 27-mile-long (50-kilometer), three-level-high limestone aqueducts that supplied the
                                  Languedoc-Roussillon city of Nîmes with water.
   THE CATEGORIES OF LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON
                     WINE

In most French wine regions, wines are labeled according to the appellation from which
they come, not the grape variety (or varieties) from which they are made. Sancerre, St.-
Émilion, and Meursault, for example, are all French appellations—specific, delimited
areas where wines are made in a traditional way according to strict regulations. For most
of modern history, these wines were known as Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC)
wines; as of 2009, however, appellation wines in France may also now use the European
Union’s designation, Protected Designation of Origin (PDO).
   Appellation wines are meant to reflect their terroir, to taste of their place. In the
Languedoc-Roussillon, such wines as Corbières, Faugères, and Minervois, for example,
are traditional appellation wines. The best of them can be downright sensational. Indeed,
within these traditional appellations, the wines from four places have been singled out as
the best of the best. Known on their labels as “Crus de Languedoc,” the four are
Corbières-Boutenac, Minervois La Livinière, St.-Chinian Roquebrun, and St.-Chinian
Berlou. More crus are awaiting official approval.
   But the Languedoc can be confusing, because coexisting with these appellation wines
are wines labeled according to the variety of grape from which they are made
(chardonnay, merlot, and the like). These fall into the all-encompassing category of Vin de
Pays d’Oc, which has smaller vins de pays inside it, such as Vin de Pays de l’Hérault. For
wines labeled simply Vin de Pays d’Oc, the grapes may be sourced from anywhere in the
entire Languedoc-Roussillon region, so the wines may or may not, in the conventional
sense, reflect the flavors associated with a place. Among the most famous vins de pays are
those from the estate Mas de Daumas Gassac, the red wine of which (principally cabernet
sauvignon) costs as much as very good quality Bordeaux. (This estate gained even greater
fame in the 2000s when it was prominently featured in the “underground” wine film,
Mondovino.)
                        CRÉMANT DE LIMOUX
The word crémant is used to describe a French sparkling wine that is made outside the
Champagne district but according to the traditional (Champagne) method. Crémants
come from all over France; some of the best-known include Crémant d’Alsace, Crémant
de Bourgogne, Crémant de Loire, and Crémant de Limoux.
    Crémants de Limoux are simple, tasty sparkling wines made in some forty-one small
villages surrounding the town of Limoux. The wines must be made primarily from
chardonnay and chenin blanc grapes, although together the two cannot exceed 90
percent of the blend. The rest can be made up of the local grape mauzac and/or pinot
noir. In the end, Crémants de Limoux are 40 to 70 percent chardonnay, 20 to 40
percent chenin blanc, 10 to 20 percent mauzac, and 0 to 10 percent pinot noir. Crémant
de Limoux must spend at least fifteen months aging on the yeast lees.
   A more traditional style of sparkling Limoux is called Blanquette de Limoux. It is
made by the traditional method but consists of at least 90 percent mauzac and is aged
just nine months on the lees, thus less than crémant. Interestingly, blanquette is the
Occitan word for the mauzac grape and also refers to the dusty, white, powdery
appearance of the leaves on mauzac vines.
                   Medieval villages dot the western hills of the Languedoc-Roussillon.

   Prior to European Union legislation in 2009, these wines were always referred to as Vin
de Pays d’Oc. Today they may still be referred to that way, but in some cases, wineries
choose instead to use the European Union designation Pays d’Oc IGP (Indication
Géographique Protégée), written in English as Pays d’Oc PGI (Protected Geographical
Indication).
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

The majority of the vineyards of the Languedoc-Roussillon are planted on a curved plain
that forms a giant, sunny semicircle facing the Mediterranean Sea. In so dependably warm
a climate, the best wines generally come from vineyards on slopes or on high, cool
plateaus along the foothills of the Pyrenees or the Cévennes Mountains. Soils in the region
vary from alluvial soils near the sea to chalk, gravel, and limestone farther inland. Some of
the best vineyards are filled with round, ancient riverbed stones, similar to those in
Châteauneuf-du-Pape.
                     VINS DOUX NATURELS AND BANYULS
 The Languedoc-Roussillon has a long tradition of producing sweet fortified wines, known collectively as
 vins doux naturels. Translated, this means natural sweet wines, although they achieve their sweetness
 by human intervention, specifically by being fortified with clear brandy (grape spirits) in order to stop
 fermentation early, thereby leaving the sweetness of unfermented grape sugar in the wines. There are
 expensive versions, and very affordable ones.
    Several of the best-known vins doux naturels are based on muscat grapes, including the locally
 famous wines Muscat de Frontignan and Muscat de St.-Jean-de-Minervois, both of which are made from
 the best type of muscat—muscat blanc à petits grains—which was cultivated by the Romans around the
 historic cities of Narbonne and Frontignan, on the Languedoc coast. A third fortified sweet wine, Muscat
 de Rivesaltes, is made with the somewhat less distinguished grape muscat of Alexandria.
    With many vins doux naturels (especially the less expensive versions), you can taste a strong
 alcoholic punch, even though they are often no higher than 16 to 17 percent alcohol by volume. They are
 certainly sweet, but not sugary, at 8 to 10 percent residual sugar. In the past, inexpensive vins doux
 naturels were often drunk as hearty aperitifs (or, the truck driver’s preference—with a shot of coffee in the
 morning). For most everyone else today, they are commonly drunk with (or as) dessert.
    Although the muscat-based vins doux naturels are the most pervasive of the Languedoc’s sweet
 fortified wines, the most unusual one is Banyuls, a reddish-colored wine made principally from grenache.
 When you think about sweet fortified reds, Port might spring to mind, but Banyuls is not Portlike. Neither
 massive in size nor dense in texture, it’s deceptively (even dangerously) elegant and easy to drink,
 thanks to its heady flavors of coffee, chestnut, mocha, and tea, which can be irresistible. Then there’s the
 chocolate-compatability factor. Banyuls is one of the small handful of wines in the world that pairs well
 with chocolate and chocolate desserts.

   Before phylloxera invaded southern France in the latter part of the nineteenth century,
the Languedoc-Roussillon was home to more than 150 different varieties of grapes. Today,
more than fifty grape varieties still grow here, but the lesser grapes that once dominated
production—aramon, macabeo, and the like—have been in a free-fall decline for more
than three decades in favor of the well-regarded Mediterranean varieties syrah, mourvèdre,
grenache, and others grown in the Rhône Valley and Provence, as well as international
varieties. It’s interesting to note, for example, that in 1968 there was no merlot in the
Languedoc. Today there are 76,000 acres (30,800 hectares) of it.
            THE TOP VILLAGES OF THE LANGUEDOC-
                        ROUSSILLON

If you go into a neighborhood wine shop in Paris, you’ll see numerous shelves sporting
wines from villages such as Corbières, Faugères, Minervois, St.-Chinian, and others,
alongside wines from the large area known simply as Languedoc. In addition, within the
Languedoc are many cru or especially high-rated villages, some of which are pending
appellation status of their own. These include Pic Saint Loup, Picpoul de Pinet, La Clape,
Quatourze, Montpeyroux, St.-Saturnin, and others. Wines from any of these well-known
villages—especially from small producers—are usually steals.




The fortified village of Carcassonne, recognized since pre-Roman times for its strategic location along two axes—linking
                    the Atlantic and the Mediterranean and linking the Pyrenees and the Massif Central.


                                   THE CAPITAL OF MUSSELS
      Culinarily speaking, the Languedoc is not as famous as its next-door neighbor, Provence, with perhaps
      one exception: mussels. The Languedoc’s tiny hamlet of Bouzigues, near the town of Sète, is considered
      the unofficial mussel capital of France. Bouzigues, in fact, is really just a string of no-frills seafood cafés
      that jut out over the glistening blue saltwater lagoon called Bassin de Thau. Here in the lagoon’s slow-
      moving current, fat, juicy mussels are cultivated in special nets or clinging to wooden frames. In just
      about every café, the mussels show up, often strewn with bits of grilled sausage, along with bottles of red
      Corbières, Faugères, Minervois, and St.-Chinian. While on first consideration mussels may seem
      exclusively white wine fare, the cafés of Bouzigues prove otherwise. Juicy, rustic Languedoc reds, with
      their supple, earthy, slightly spicy flavors, can be real winners in this combination.

   Corbières is spread over the undulating northern foothills of the Pyrenees, in the
western part of the Languedoc-Roussillon. This fairly large region (about 34,000
acres/13,800 hectares) specializes in dense, juicy, slightly spicy, rustic, garigue-infused red
blends based on carignan. One of the four crus of the Languedoc is here—Corbières-
Boutenac. Top small Corbières producers include Domaine du Grand Crès, Gérard
Bertrand, Ollieux Romanis, Domaine de Villemajou, and Château Mansenoble.
   Faugères, in the center of the Languedoc-Roussillon, near the little town of Béziers, is
about one-eighth the size of Corbières and makes spicy, earthy, and powerful reds,
especially from old carignan vines. Faugères’ top producers include Leon Barral, Château
La Liquière, and Gilbert Alquier.
   North of Corbières, in the hilly western Languedoc, Minervois (about 12,000
acres/4,900 hectares) is known for well-priced red wines that, at their best, have
outrageously good flavor. That’s especially true of the cru de Languedoc called Minervois
La Livinière, which is up in the rocky hills above the flat plateau. Here, old, low-yield
vines of carignan, along with grenache, syrah, and other southern French varieties, are
made into wines that are dense, rich, and for all the world taste like blackberry syrup
poured over stones. Among the best producers here are Borie de Maurel, Domaine Anne
Gros, Château Massamier la Mignarde, Gérard Bertrand, and Domaine Combe Blanche.
   Between Minervois and Faugères lies the small (about 6,000 acres/2,400 hectares) red
wine appellation of St.-Chinian. From the northern part of the region come gutsy red
wines with sharp-edged grip, while wines from the southern part are usually softer. As is
true in Corbières, Faugères, and Minervois, carignan is still a player in the blends here, but
increasingly it is being supplanted by syrah, grenache, and mourvèdre. Two of the crus de
Languedoc are here: St.-Chinian Roquebrun and St.-Chinian Berlou. Look for the
producers Clos Bagatelle, Canet-Valette, Domaine de Viranel, Laurent Miquel, and
Château Maurel Fonsalade.




Bouzigues, a tiny village on the Mediterranean, is one of France’s top spots for fresh-out-of-water mussels and oysters.
           WHEN YOU VISIT… THE LANGUEDOC-
                    ROUSSILLON
THE LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLON is one of France’s most compelling regions from the
standpoints of history, architecture, and religion. Ancient monasteries and magnificent
Roman ruins exist side by side with sun-drenched vineyards, creating a cultural
tapestry that is both fascinating and poignant.
ONE OF THE BEST EXAMPLES OF MEDIEVAL ARCHITECTURE IN THE WORLD IS
HERE: the ancient Cité de Carcassonne, a medieval town located within the core of the
modern city of Carcassonne. The Cité has been named a UNESCO World Heritage
Site for its impeccably preserved stone walls and citadel.
THE LANGUEDOC-ROUSSILLION’S annual extravaganza—the raucous Féria de
Béziers—takes place every August in the city of Béziers (the French equivalent of
Pamplona in Spain). A four-day festival of bullfighting, eating, drinking, and dancing, it’s
attended by more than one million people.
AND DON’T MISS THE STUNNING, 24,000-seat amphitheater in the ancient city of
Nîmes. Built around A.D. 1 by the Romans, using stones but no mortar, it remains one
of the best-preserved amphitheaters in existence. Nearby is the Roman stone temple
La Maison Carrée, originally dedicated to the adopted sons of Augustus Caesar.
AND FINALLY, A GASTRONOMIC MUST: the tiny coastal village of Bouzigues, near
Sète, where extraordinary oysters and mussels are farmed in saltwater lagoons. The
only establishments in Bouzigues are no-frills seafood cafés, where the platters of
shellfish are incomparable.
           The Languedoc-Roussillon Wines to Know
The most spectacular wines of the Languedoc-Roussillon are generally not the easy-to-find Vin de Pays d’Oc wines
(Mas de Daumas Gassac excepted) but, rather, the region’s great traditional reds from villages like St. Chinian,
Faugères, and Minervos. These wines—often made from old vine carignan, syrah, and mourvèdre—have beautiful
richness and spiciness, and I’ve focused on them below.

                                                   WHITE




                                    MAS DE DAUMAS GASSAC
                                        VIN DE PAYS DE L’HÉRAULT
    Approximately one-third each of chardonnay, viognier, and petit manseng, plus a touch of muscat,
                                       marsanne, and roussanne
Mas de Daumas Gassac is widely acknowledged as one of the first estates to prove that wines without AOC status
(such as this vin de pays) could nonetheless be serious, complex wines capable of long aging (and of commanding
high prices). Indeed, the estate’s first wine was produced in 1978 under the guidance of the famous French
enologist Émile Peynaud, who considered the estate’s geography and terroir exemplary for fine wine production.
Mas de Daumas Gassac was founded by the irascible Aimé Guibert, who still owns it (Guibert was prominantly
featured in the documentary film, Mondovino). The Mas de Daumas Gassac red is a beauty of a wine, structured
much like a fine Bordeaux. But I also love the estate’s white, made in smaller amounts, and perhaps more
distinctive. The richness of chardonnay, the floral-ness of viognier, and the exotic-ness of petit manseng make a
fascinating combination, and the wine possesses an uncanny elegance.

                                                    REDS
                                          DOMAINE RIMBERT
                                      ST.-CHINIAN | LE MAS AU SCHISTE
                                   40% carignan, 30% syrah, 30% grenache
The old vineyards of Jean-Marie Rimbert (some with vines broaching a century of age) are in the scenic foothills of
the Cévennes Mountains, part of France’s huge Massif Central. (The area of the Cévennes is one of the original
homes of the French Protestants known as Huguenots.) This wine is unmistakable as a St.-Chinian, and evidence
that carignan, at least in the Languedoc, can be coaxed to great heights. Violety and minerally, with dark berry
flavors, it belongs to the school of red wines that have huge, savory intensity without heaviness. Immaculately “on
point,” the flavor of this wine is not diffused by broad vanilla strokes of oak, nor is the fruit dulled down to mush
from overripeness. Instead it has that sexy, vivid, floral/earthy character that makes the traditional appellations of
the Languedoc-Roussillon so desirable.
                                               HECHT & BANNIER

                                                    FAUGÈRES
                                   55% syrah, 35% mourvèdre, 10% carignan
In 2012, Gregory Hecht and François Bannier formed a négociant business focused on extraordinary small
vineyards in the best traditional appellations of the Languedoc-Roussillon. Their wines seem to hit the mark every
time—loaded with character, they exude a southern French sophistication. This Faugères, for example, is massive
and masculine in structure and vividly alive, with notes of peat, violets, minerals, black tea, savory dried herbs, and
a salty/iodine-like character. Plus, of course, waves of dense fruit that seem like a tasty fabric woven from black
and red cherries. The partners’ other signature wine—the Côtes du Roussillon—is a savory, gamy, berry-infused
implosion of earth, spice, and fruit.
                                           DOMAINE DE L’HORTUS

                                                PIC SAINT LOUP
                         Approximately 50% syrah, 30% grenache, 20% mourvèdre
Domaine de l’Hortus is known for soft, dense reds with waves of wild resinous herbs (garigue) and the scent of
woodlands floating through them. At their best, they are dark reds with a delicious savoriness reminiscent of meat
juices. This wine comes into your mouth with a big arc of flavor and finishes with a spicy/minerally bang. The
domaine is a family estate lying in a valley between two facing limestone cliffs, the Pic Saint Loup and the
Montagne de l’Hortus. The word hortus is Latin for “garden,” a reference to the many gardens the Romans found,
to their surprise, when they arrived in the area. Long before then, this valley and the many natural caves embedded
in the surrounding, protective mountains are thought to have been one of the areas where Neanderthals found
refuge.
                                            GÉRARD BERTRAND

                                    MINERVOIS LA LIVINIÈRE | LE VIALA
                                  60% syrah, 25% grenache, 15% carignan
Gérard Bertrand makes several terrific, honest wines in the Languedoc-Roussillon, but it’s this wine—his
Minervois La Livinière called Le Viala—that I find the most special. Loaded with sexy, spicy, sweaty, firm, and
powerful aromas and flavors, it sits on a delicious precipice between flavors reminiscent of the earth (rocks,
minerals, bark) and flavors evocative of darkness (dark plums, black figs, bitter chocolate). As in so many really
good Languedoc wines, there’s also a sophisticated hint of gaminess and animal fur. The small, 15-acre (6-hectare)
vineyard for Le Viala sits on a south-facing, clay- and limestone-covered hillside of the Montagne Noire—Black
Mountains.

                                            SWEET WINES
                                             DOMAINE CAZES
                                              RIVESALTES | AMBRÉ
                                               100% grenache blanc
A completely unique, elegant, complex, orange/amber–colored wine, the ravishingly distinct Ambré is reminiscent
of exotic spices, tea, caramel, brown sugar, dried fruits, mushrooms, and brandy. It is made by Domaine Cazes,
founded in 1895 and one of the leading estates making vin doux naturel (the estate has no relationship with the well
known Cazes family of Bordeaux). The grapes grow in a brilliantly sunny, limestone/clay amphitheater halfway
between the Pyrenees Mountains to the west and the Mediterranean Sea to the east. Often served chilled as an
aperitif, the wine is somewhat like amontillado Sherry, and somewhat like tawny Port. Its complexity and unreal
color come in part from its aging for seven to ten years or more in large oak casks (foudres) before release.




                                               LES PETITS GRAINS

                MUSCAT DE SAINT JEAN DE MINERVOIS | SAINT JEAN DE MINERVOIS
                                        100% muscat blanc à petits grains
This vin doux natural is one of the most lip-smacking wines of the Languedoc—and a wine so abuzz with fresh,
delicious apricot flavors that you feel like you’ve just fallen into a pool of cool apricot and orange puree. The wine
is not syrupy sweet, not heavy, not viscous, and nothing like, say, Sauternes. And there’s no punch of alcohol (even
though the wine is lightly fortified). Instead, this dessert wine floats over to you on a cloud of fruit, then opens up
and drenches you with irresistible flavor. Located on a high limestone plateau above Minervois proper, the small
appellation Saint Jean de Minervois makes some of the most luscious fortified sweet wines of France.
The sheer magnificence of the Provence coast eventually captures us all. Here, the Corniche d’Or, the coastal route
                               along the Esterel Mountains on the French Riviera.
PROVENCE

The word Provence induces hunger, not thirst. One hardly thinks of wine at all, except as
something to brace you for the oncoming wave of a great, garlicky aioli. It’s not that the
wines of Provence do not deserve attention. The problem is getting sidetracked by
bouillabaisse—or by landscapes so beautiful that van Gogh, Renoir, Matisse, Picasso, and
Cézanne could not stop painting them. Yet Provence’s wines are both special and
delicious. Provençal rosés (what everyone drinks with the local cuisine) are famous for
their refreshing slash of flavor. The region’s reds—bold and distinctive—are creating a
small surge of new excitement. And although the quality of the white wines ranges across
the board, the best of them are perfect with a plate of grilled Mediterranean fish. One thing
is for sure: Provençal foods do throw the switch that makes Provençal wines come alive.

      The Romans called this region nostra provincia, our province, hence
      Provence.
   Provence encompasses the vast, rambling countryside of far southeastern France. In
fact, one can’t get any farther south, for Provence dead-ends on the beaches of the French
Riviera. From the coast, with its famous seaside towns of Marseille, Bandol, and St.-
Tropez, Provence extends inland. How far is hard to say; it sometimes overlaps with the
Rhône Valley. Indeed, the French often define Provence more by its remarkable landscape
—which is to say, by the presence of garigue. The word describes the character of the
land: sunbaked, low, rolling hills covered in thin, rocky soils of limestone, schist, and
quartz, plus old oaks and dry, scrubby, resiny plants—especially wild rosemary, wild
thyme, and wild lavender. The best Provençal wines are said to smell and taste of garigue.

                         THE QUICK SIP ON PROVENCE
         PROVENCE, in the far southeastern corner of France, along the Mediterranean Sea,
         has only recently emerged as a region producing serious wines.
         THE MAJORITY OF PROVENÇAL WINES are blends based on a curious array of
         international as well as Rhône grape varieties.
         PROVENCE MAKES DELICIOUS red wines, but the most popular Provençal wines are
         zesty, refreshing rosés, which are the gold standard for rosés everywhere.

   Provence’s four most important wine appellations all fall in the far south, with some
bordering on the Mediterranean. They are: Bandol, Cassis, Coteaux d’Aix-en-Provence
(and its terrific, tiny subregion, Les Baux de Provence), and Côtes de Provence. Bandol is
the most prestigious; Côtes de Provence is the largest.
   Provence’s eclectic hodgepodge of grape varieties reflects the region’s rich history of
political affiliations with just about every Mediterranean power, large and small. Most of
the Rhône grapes are grown, as well as traditional Provençal grapes; Italian grapes, such
as vermentino; and even Bordeaux grapes, such as cabernet sauvignon.
Viognier grapes bask in the warmth that emanates from the rocky soils of the famous Domaine Trévallon near Les Baux.


                                         ROSÉ, JUST RIGHT
     If there’s a lesson to learn from Provence in matching wine and food, it’s the amazing versatility of
     snappy fruity rosés in complementing countless Mediterranean dishes. In particular, Provençal rosés are
     delicious with the region’s seafood dishes, seasoned as they usually are with generous amounts of olive
     oil, garlic, herbs, and spices. The supreme example is bouillabaisse, the traditional Provençal fish stew
     flavored with olive oil, saffron, and dried orange peel, and then usually served with croutons and rouille,
     a super-garlicky, pepper-spiked mayonnaise. The flavor of many wines would disappear or be distorted by
     such dramatic ingredients. Not so with Provençal rosés. Boldly fruity and substantial in body, they are
     tailor-made for bouillabaisse and other hearty seafood dishes.


    The climate of Provence is dramatic. The sun (three thousand hours of sunlight a year!)
bounces off the land and sea, creating relentless light—no wonder painters love it. As in
the Rhône, the aggressive wind from the north, known as Le Mistral, cools the vines and
helps prevent rot, but it can also tear the vines apart. The best vineyards are therefore
located in protected pockets, mostly facing south toward the Mediterranean, with the hills
at their backs.
                             THE GRAPES OF PROVENCE
 Provençal wines have historically been blends of many grape varieties that on their own would be
 undistinguished.

                                               WHITES
 BOURBOULENC: Commonly used in blending. Rustic and undistinguished on its own.
 CHARDONNAY, MARSANNE, SAUVIGNON BLANC, SÉMILLON, AND VIOGNIER: Commonly used in
 blends, especially in more modern avant-garde wines.
 CLAIRETTE: Very common blending grape in traditional white wines. Can have pretty aromas and good
 acidity.
 GRENACHE BLANC: White clone of grenache. Very common blending grape in traditional white wines.
 Can make delicious, citrusy wines of personality.
 ROLLE: Also known as vermentino. Adds freshness and vivacity to blends.
 UGNI BLANC: Undistinguished, common blending grape.

                                                 REDS
 BRAQUET, CALITOR, CARIGNAN, CINSAUT, FOLLE NOIRE, AND TIBOUREN: Grapes used in
 blending. At low yields, carignan can have real character, and cinsaut is a major force in many rosés.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Used in some of the best reds and rosés, especially in the appellations
 Coteaux d’Aix-en-Provence and Côtes de Provence.
 GRENACHE: Common blending grape used in many reds and most rosés. Can add delicious berry
 flavors.
 MOURVÈDRE: Major grape, used in many of the top reds and rosés for structure.
 SYRAH: Fairly minor grape in Provence, but used in some of the very best reds.



BANDOL
The best appellation in Provence, Bandol is a relatively small seaside region about a 30-
mile (48-kilometer) drive southeast from the center of Marseille. The best Bandol rosés
(Domaines Ott’s Cuvée Marine, for example) usually have a higher percentage of spicy,
structured mourvèdre than less well-favored examples. But red wines are where the real
action is. These are deep, wild, leathery, spicy wines. By law, they must be 50 percent
mourvèdre, and some producers use as much as 100 percent.
   There are dozens of small producers in Bandol, as well as cooperatives. The most
famous producer is Domaine Tempier, owned by the Peyraud family. Like romantic
characters out of a novel on the alluring back-to-basics Provençal lifestyle, the Peyrauds
not only make some of Provence’s most ravishing red and rosé wines on their humble,
charming estate but they are also among the region’s best cooks. The matriarch of the
family, Lulu Peyraud, was a mentor to the famous California chef Alice Waters.
       Butter and cheese. The king and queen of French gastronomy in a region that lives to eat (and drink).


COTEAUX D’AIX-EN-PROVENCE
North and west of the old town of Aix, in the heart of Provence, is the wine region of
Coteaux d’Aix-en-Provence. At about 9,100 acres (3,700 hectares), it’s roughly twenty
times larger than Cassis. Within this large appellation is a smaller, renowned appellation
known as Les Baux de Provence. Here, the limestone soils and hot days are perfect for red
grapes (the surrounding valley is known as the Val d’Enfer—“Valley of Hell”).

                                                   PASTIS
    The most well-loved aperitif in Provence is pastis, a greenish-yellow, licorice-flavored liqueur served with
    a carafe of ice water. When the water is added to the pastis, the drink immediately turns ominously
    cloudy. The licoricey forerunner of pastis, absinthe, was outlawed by the French government in 1915
    because of the toxicity of the wormwood leaves from which it was made. Today, pastis, which does not
    include wormwood and is not toxic, is made by infusing either licorice or aniseed in a distilled spirit.



                THE MOST IMPORTANT PROVENÇAL WINES
                                  LEADING APPELLATIONS
         BANDOL red and rosé
         COTEAUX D’AIX-EN-PROVENCE white, red, and rosé
         CÔTES DE PROVENCE white, red, and rosé
         LES BAUX DE PROVENCE red and rosé

                                   APPELLATION OF NOTE
         CASSIS white
   The best wines are made from grenache, cinsaut, mourvèdre, and syrah, with cabernet
sauvignon and carignan allowed to make up 30 percent of the blend, but no more.
Cabernet is the surprise here, for it’s not a Mediterranean grape and is extremely rare in
other parts of Provence, and nonexistent in the Rhône. Less rosé (and far less white wine)
is made in Coteaux d’Aix, although some local finds are surprisingly good.
   Among the top producers are Mas de la Dame, Domaine de Trévallon, and Château
Vignelaure. It was the former owner of Château Vignelaure, Georges Brunet, who, among
others, brought cabernet sauvignon to Provence from Bordeaux in the 1960s. Brunet had
once owned Bordeaux’s Château La Lagune.

CÔTES DE PROVENCE
Like Côtes-du-Rhône, the appellation Côtes de Provence is not a single place but rather
many vast tracts (almost 50,000 acres/20,200 hectares in all) of noncontiguous vineyards.
These are found in every part of Provence except the west. Côtes de Provence wines are
therefore the product of numerous small, individual climates and terrains. They range a lot
in quality.
   Almost 90 percent of the wine is dry rosé, based on grenache, cinsaut, and the local red
grape tibouren. A lion’s share of this is simply chugalug co-op pink. But there are also a
few fine estates concentrating on making serious rosés from the grapes listed above, as
well as reds based increasingly on cabernet sauvignon or syrah.
   The most famous and largest of the top estates is the family-owned firm of Domaines
Ott, the wines of which are sold in unique, amphora-shaped (some say bowling-pin-
shaped) bottles. The Otts own several properties in the Côtes de Provence, plus one in
Bandol. Although white wines are fairly rare in the Côtes de Provence, the Otts make
three, as well as two earthy, spicy reds. But most famous are the Ott rosés. The regular
one, called Clair de Noirs, is a wine you could easily drink all summer long, and the
sharper, more bracing one, called La Déesse, is just waiting for any food slathered in aioli.

                                                  CASSIS
    The cassis most of us first knew is a black-currant liqueur, which, when added to white wine, makes an
    aperitif called a Kir. Although the names are the same, Cassis, the wine region, has nothing to do with the
    liqueur. A popular (but minor) appellation of Provence, Cassis is a small fishing village a few miles
    southeast of Marseille. Stories are told about how the prostitutes of Marseille, in times past, helped pick
    the grapes at harvest. Surrounding the fishing village are the vineyards, fewer than 400 acres 160
    hectares) in all. Most of the wine is mouthfilling dry white, made principally from clairette and marsanne
    grapes.



                            WHEN YOU VISIT… PROVENCE
         Provence is undoubtedly one of the world’s most charming wine regions, conducive to
         aimless wanderlust and weeks spent crisscrossing the countryside, visiting wine
         estates, and making a habit of cold carafes of rosé twice a day in countless cafés. Most
         Provençal wine estates are small and fairly humble. It’s good to make an appointment
         in advance and very helpful to speak French.
                         The Provençal Wines to Know
Sitting in a café, you could drink the best wines of Provence all day long. They are mostly not intellectual wines,
but wines of pleasure… wines that remind us of the time when reaching for a gulp of wine was as natural and
common as reaching for a hunk of bread.

                                                    WHITE




                                            MAS DE LA DAME
                                    LES BAUX DE PROVENCE | LA STÈLE
                                            80% rolle, 20% roussanne
Mas de la Dame (“Farm of the Women”) makes some of the most distinctive (and good-value) wines of Provence—
wines that speak of the luminous sun and of the hard scrabble of the wild, herb-covered, stony escarpment called
the Alpilles. This wine—their white—smells like a southern French kitchen with sage and thyme hanging from the
rafters and wild anise and lavender growing in flowerpots on the windows. It’s a weighty white in terms of body
(all the better when in the company of garlic), but has no oakiness or sweetness. The La Stèle Rouge (grenache and
syrah)—a spicy/peppery red—is also stellar. The name La Stèle (the word is Latin for a stone erected for funereal
or commemorative purposes) comes from a quote by Nostradamus, “un jour, la mer recouvrira la terre et s’arrêtera
à la stèle du Mas de la Dame” (“One day, the sea will once again cover the land and will stop at the stele of Mas de
la Dame”). Nostrodamus, a sixteenth-century Provençal apothecary and healer during one of Europe’s worst
plagues, was also purported to be a “seer” of the future (he made 6,338 prophecies). The original fifteenth-century
estate (upon which the current Mas de la Dame was founded in the early 1900s) was owned by a woman named
Hélène Hugoléne, the first “dame.” It is not known exactly how Nostrodamus came to be familiar with the estate
and its wines, though the property would probably have been known to any educated inhabitant of Provence at the
time.

                                                     ROSÉS
                                        CHÂTEAU D’ESCLANS
                                        CÔTES DE PROVENCE | ROSÉ
                                 Mostly grenache with some rolle (vermentino)
The beautiful, unreal color of this rosé could not be characterized as pink, exactly—it’s more like light with a
translucent copper/silver sheen. The wine itself is fantastically fresh—chalky and palate coating, with a bracingly
dry finish. It’s a bold wine, with dramatic impact on the palate—a character all the best Provençal rosés possess. It
deserves to be served unabashedly cold, next to cold poached lobster. Owned by Sacha Lichine, whose family is the
former owner of Bordeaux’s Château Prieuré-Lichine, and Patrick Léon, the former managing director of Château
Mouton-Rothschild, the estate also produces a less-pricey rosé called Whispering Angel, and what may be the only
$100 bottle of rosé in the world—called Garrus—but I find this wine, known as the estate wine, so much more pure
and true.
                                            CHÂTEAU BEAULIEU

                                  COTEAUX D’AIX-EN-PROVENCE | ROSÉ
                            40% grenache, 40% syrah, 20% cabernet sauvignon
The color of this superb wine—an ever-so-delicate neon orange-pink—could set off a fashion rage. But the flavor—
utterly refined, with a starburst of pure watermelon and strawberry—is the best part. Then there’s the way the wine
moves on the palate, a sort of zoom/splash/bite effect. Vivid yet elegant rosés such as this seem to encapsulate
happiness.

                                                    REDS
                                         DOMAINE TEMPIER
                                           BANDOL | LA TOURTINE
                         Approximately 80% mourvèdre, plus cinsaut and grenache
From a single chalky-clay hillside vineyard above the village of Le Castellet comes Domaine Tempier’s almost
menacingly powerful La Tourtine. It is a textbook example of the dark, masculine wines that emerge from
mourvèdre, one of the latest-ripening grapes in the world (and thus a grape that absolutely needs the massively
sunny, dry climate of Bandol. The edge and grip of this wine is astounding, as is its savory Provençal meaty
character—a flavor not unlike the crust of a lamb chop that has been covered in olive oil and herbs and then roasted
(a dish, by the way, that a wine like this really needs). The four-hundred-year-old Domaine Tempier is a legendary
estate in Provence. In 1936, Lucie Tempier married Lucien Peyraud, and throughout their marriage, the Peyrauds
worked tirelessly to elevate the wines of Bandol and the status of mourvèdre as one of France’s great grapes. Their
impact also extended into cuisine. Lucie Tempier (known as Lulu), a highly accomplished French cook, was a
mentor to California’s famous chef Alice Waters, whom many credit with ushering in a new culinary era in the
United States.
                                           CHÂTEAU DE PIBARNON

                                                     BANDOL
                                                 100% mourvèdre
This is what I think of as an honest wine—a wine that mirrors its landscape and offers it back as something to be
tasted and taken into the body. The edgy, minerally, rocky flavors are animated, and the sense of fresh red cherries
and raspberries gives the wine a brightness. But there’s intrigue here, too… notes of animal fur, strange spices,
coffee, roasted meats—the kind of primordial aromas and flavors that are the apogee of mourvèdre, and that take
our senses to a darker side. One of the top estates of Provence, Pibarnon sits above the rocky limestone
amphitheater that is Bandol, on hillsides facing the sea.
                                         DOMAINE DE TRÉVALLON

                                  VIN DE PAYS DES BOUCHES DU RHÔNE
                             Approximately 50% cabernet sauvignon, 50% syrah
This absolutely scrumptious and legendary wine is not to be missed. Black, thick, and silky, in most years it’s got
an almost hauntingly masculine, earthy, minerally aroma. The flavors all suggest wildness—wild blackberries and
brambles; wild resiny herbs; wild tangles of dried brush; wild exotic spices. Domaine de Trévallon’s vineyards are
on the edge of the rocky Alpilles Mountains, surrounded by the eerie, desolate landscape of the Val d’Enfer
(“Valley of Hell”). The domaine specializes in cabernet sauvignon, which here turns into wines as startling and
dramatic as the land itself. Indeed, were it not for the large percentage of cabernet, the wine would carry the AOC
designation Les Baux de Provence. But Les Baux limits the amount of cabernet a wine can have, and thus the
appellation of this fantastic red is Vin de Pays des Bouches du Rhône.
Autumn in Gascony, Armagnac’s home in the southwestern corner of France.
ARMAGNAC & COGNAC

THE TWO FAMOUS GRAPE-BASED SPIRITS OF
FRANCE


                                      ARMAGNAC

Deep in France’s southwest corner, about 100 miles (160 kilometers) south of Bordeaux,
lies Gascony, a bucolic farming region and an enclave for perhaps the most sensual, rich,
rustic cooking in France. Indulgences (if not contraband) elsewhere, foie gras and confit of
duck are virtually daily fare here, and the propensity to sauté the accompanying potatoes
(or just about any other vegetable) in duck fat, too, leaves French nutritionists wondering
why the local population isn’t keeling over. But in Gascony, eating traditionally matters.
Not surprisingly, so does drinking well.




                  Monsieur Gessler sits among his oldest Armagnacs at Domaine de Joÿ.

   As the local desserts—soufflé of prunes in Armagnac and fruit strudel laced with
Armagnac—reveal, this is the home of one of France’s most well-loved brandies.
Armagnac (ARE-ma-nyack) is far less famous than its sister, Cognac, and the two are
usually assumed to be quite similar, since both are distilled from grapes. Not so. In
everything from how it tastes to how it is made, Armagnac is distinct and unique. It is
decidedly not Cognac, and when you’re in Gascony, you get the feeling that the
Armagnacais, as the people of the region are called, like it that way. Proud and somewhat
stubborn, they quickly remind you that this, after all, is the home of d’Artagnan, the most
famed of the fictionalized king’s musketeers who, in the nineteenth century, were
immortalized by Alexandre Dumas.
   Armagnac has the longest history of any French brandy. By the thirteenth century,
simple distilling techniques first used in the Arab world (primarily for perfumes) had
spread into Spain and over the Pyrenees into southwest France. Like distillations of local
herbs and flowers, the first distillations of the region’s grapes, thought to have occurred in
the early fifteenth century, were for medical purposes. The clear brandies that resulted—
the seminal Armagnacs—were said to inspire a sense of well-being, relieve toothaches,
diminish mental anguish, and promote courage. (Joan of Arc, although not from the
region, came to be known as l’Armagnacaise, because of her courage.)
   Being first didn’t guarantee Armagnac the prominence you might expect. Unlike the
region of Cognac, Armagnac was isolated inland, with no navigable river that could serve
as an easy means of promoting commerce. Nonetheless, by the seventeenth century Dutch
traders installed themselves in Gascony, as they did in Cognac, and the production of
Armagnac increased, even though it had to be transported overland before it could be
loaded on ships destined for northern markets. By the middle of the nineteenth century, a
canal built on a local river connected Armagnac to Bordeaux, and for the first time its
brandy became readily accessible.

      The top Armagnacs are masculine spirits—more rustic, robust, and full-
      bodied than the top Cognacs.


                                              CALVADOS
         Unlike its French cousins Cognac and Armagnac, both of which are distilled from
         grapes, Calvados (CAL-va-dose) is distilled from apples (and sometimes pears)—but
         not just any apples. Approximately 800 or so heirloom varieties of apples grow in
         Normandy, the French region most famous for this drink. Of these, most producers
         would grow 20 to 25 different varieties, among them, Douce Moen, Kermerrien, Douce
         Coet Ligne, Bedan, Binet Rouge, Frequin Rouge, Marie Menard, and Petit Jaune. The
         apples fall into four flavor categories: sweet, bittersweet, bitter, and acidic. By distilling
         different kinds of apples in different proportions, the Calvados maker crafts a subtle,
         complex apple spirit. About 17 pounds of apples are needed to make one bottle of
         Calvados.
            By law, Calvados can be made only in Normandy. It’s a staunch tradition for diners in
         the region to imbibe a shot of Calvados in the middle of a long, rich meal. The shot,
         called a trou Normand (Norman hole), supposedly creates a hole in the stomach,
         temporarily halting digestion and allowing even more food to be eaten!
             The most famous district within the Calvados region is the Pays d’Auge, known for
         its chalky soil and superior apples. All Calvados Pays d’Auge is double-distilled in a pot
         still and aged in oak casks for a minimum of twenty-four months, although some of the
         finest spirits may be aged in oak for more than six years. (Calvados made in a sister
         region of the Pays d’Auge—Calvados Domfrontais—is made from at least 30 percent
         pears in addition to apples.) Notable producers include Michel Huard, Boulard, Busnel,
         Christian Drouin, and Roger Groult, as well as the artisanal producer/growers Domaine
         de Montreuil, Lemorton, and Adrien Camut.
                 A farmhouse in Normandy where Calvados is distilled from heirloom apples.

   The vineyards dedicated to the production of Armagnac cover some 11,776 acres
(4,766 hectares) and are divided into three subdistricts: the Bas Armagnac, Armagnac-
Ténarèze, and the Haut Armagnac. Of the three, the Bas Armagnac (lower Armagnac, so
named for its lesser altitude) not only produces the most wine for distillation (67 percent),
but it’s also home to most of the top producers and best Armagnacs, with their flavor notes
of plums and prunes. Situated in western Gascony, near the immense pine forests of the
Landes, the Bas Armagnac is noted for its sand-based soil, often with a high iron content,
plus small pieces of clay. Armagnacs from Ténarèze can be more floral, lively, and sharp
when young, although they develop finesse with age. Some 32 percent of the wine
destined for distillation is made in this subregion. As for the Haut Armagnac, only 1
percent of all Armagnacs are produced there today. If an Armagnac is from the Bas
Armagnac, it will say so on the label. Armagnacs from Ténarèze are sometimes labeled as
such, but more often the label will simply read Armagnac.
The old copper still of the Samalens Distillery, one of the top producers of Armagnac. Most Armagnacs are distilled only
                                        once, giving the spirit a robust character.

   The top Armagnacs are more rustic, robust, fragrant, and full-bodied than the top
Cognacs, and the reason begins with the grapes. In Cognac, the neutral-tasting grape ugni
blanc makes up most of the blend. In Armagnac, ugni blanc is only about 55 percent of the
blend to be distilled. The rest comes from up to eleven other white grapes, although just
four—folle blanche, colombard, ugni blanc, and to a declining extent, Baco blanc—are of
importance. While all provide a so-called “neutral foundation” for Armagnac, folle
blanche is also thought to contribute some faint elegance, plus floral and fruity notes, and
colombard is said to add a slightly herbal note. As for Baco blanc, or Baco 22A, as it is
more technically known, the grape is a hybrid. It was developed after the phylloxera
epidemic and was well appreciated for its resistance to rot and mildew. In Armagnac it
adds such fullness and character to the blend that the resulting eau-de-vie is almost fat.
Armagnacs made with a significant amount of Baco are instantly loved for their rich
fruitiness, even if they do lack a little elegance. Interesting, in the 1990s the French
government stipulated that wines and brandies with Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée
status (which Armagnac has) must, as of 2010, discontinue any use of hybrids and instead
be based exclusively on vinifera varieties. The outcry in Armagnac was so strong that in
2005 a legal exception was made. Today, Armagnac is the only AOC wine in France that
may legally include hybrid grapes.
   Armagnac is distilled in a way that accentuates its already bold character. Rather than
being double distilled, as Cognacs are, most (but not all) Armagnacs are distilled only
once. Single distillation results in a more gutsy, aromatic, and less polished eau-de-vie
when it is young. The distillation takes place in what is known as a continuous still. The
process (simplified) goes like this: The base wine enters a gas-fired still and is heated in a
chamber. From there it passes into the main column of the still, where it cascades over a
number of hot plates. When it reaches the bottom, it begins to evaporate. The alcoholic
vapors then rise back up through the incoming wine, causing the eau-de-vie to take on
more flavors and aromas. Finally, the vapors exit through the top of the column into a
condensing coil (where they become liquid as they cool). This liquid is ultimately
collected in wooden casks where it will remain to age, becoming, in time, Armagnac.
    Since Cognac’s double distillation results in a more polished, elegant brandy that can
ultimately be drunk younger, you might wonder why single distillation is appealing to
most Armagnac producers. The answer is historic. Armagnac producers tend to be tiny
(there are no large firms equivalent to Cognac’s Courvoisier, Martell, Rémy Martin, or
Hennessy) and comparatively poor. Many never had the capital required to own their own
stills. Producers traditionally relied on distillers who, with movable stills (alambics
ambulants), went from farm to farm from November to January. The continuous still was,
and is, both easier to transport and cheaper to run.
   The eau-de-vie that emerges from the still in precious drops is not yet an Armagnac,
however. What turns the eau-de-vie into brandy is aging in oak barrels, in this case 106- to
111-gallon (400- to 420-liter) casks, often from the black oak of the Monlezun forest in
Bas Armagnac, or from the Limousin forest of southern France. While the Armagnac-to-
be is left in wood to mature, evaporation of both water and, to a somewhat lesser extent,
alcohol concentrates the liquid. Because of this, Armagnacs, like Cognacs, are gradually
cut with water or petites eaux, a weak mixture of water and Armagnac, to bring their final
alcohol level down to 40 percent, or 80 proof.
   Armagnacs are sold in three ways: by such terms as VSOP and XO, by age
designations, and by vintage. Armagnacs that carry designations like VSOP are blends of
a variety of eaux-de-vie of different ages. As in Cognac, the designations indicate the age
of the youngest eau-de-vie in the blend but the average age of the Armagnac is usually
older. Here are the lengths of time the youngest eau-de-vie in an Armagnac blend must be
aged in barrel:
VS (VERY SUPERIOR) OR THREE STAR (***):   one to three years
VSOP (VERY SUPERIOR OLD PALE):   four to nine years
NAPOLÉON:   six to nine years
XO (EXTRA OLD) AND HORS D’AGE:   ten to nineteen years
XO PREMIUM:   more than twenty years
   Finally, Armagnacs are often labeled according to vintage, something that’s rare in
Cognac. The eau-de-vie in a vintage Armagnac must come entirely from that vintage and
be aged for a minimum of ten years in barrel prior to release. (The bottle must indicate a
bottling date so that you know when the Armagnac was taken out of the barrel.)
    Armagnacs don’t really age once they are removed from the barrel and put in glass
bottles, where they’re protected from oxygen. A 1947 Armagnac that stayed in the barrel
for twenty years, for example, is different from a 1947 Armagnac that stayed in the barrel
for forty years before being bottled. But an Armagnac distilled in 1947 and put in bottles
in, say, 1975, and one distilled in 1970 and bottled in 1998 are equally mature—twenty-
eight years—even though they bear different vintage dates.
   A great Armagnac has a complex flavor reminiscent of prunes, quince, dried apricots,
vanilla, earth, caramel, roasted walnuts, and toffee, and it is best when it is well aged,
which is to say ten years old or older. Younger Armagnacs have not developed any of the
extraordinary nuances of older ones, and they often taste too blatantly fiery. It’s easy to tell
how old a vintage Armagnac is; ditto for an Armagnac labeled trente ans d’age (thirty
years old). But it’s not so easy to tell when the Armagnac is labeled with letters or names,
such as Extra or Napoléon, since those letters and names tell you only the minimum age of
the youngest eau-de-vie in the blend, not the average age of blend as a whole. The best
advice here is to let price be your guide. There’s no such thing as a cheap, well-aged
Armagnac. Among the top producers of Armagnac are the négociants Sempé,
Larressingle, Samalens, Marquis de Caussade, Darroze, Château de Laubade, and
Tariquet, as well as the artisanal producers Château de Ravignan, Domaine d’Ognoas,
Domaine Boingnères, Delord, Domaine du Miquer, Château de Briat, and Pellehaut.
                                       COGNAC

I’m not sure I knew what to expect the first time I visited the Cognac region, but the
throttling potency of the (not-very-high-quality) Cognacs I had drunk up until then
certainly did not prepare me for so gentle, so pastoral, so enchanting a landscape. This is
France at her most timeless—waves of green vineyards, thick cornfields, and meadows
noisy with birds are dotted here and there with stone farmhouses and unassuming hamlets.
The region, 197,000 acres (79,700 hectares) of vines, is about a one-and-a-half hour drive
north of Bordeaux and worlds apart in character.
    Technically, the Cognac (CON-nyack) region falls into two French administrative
départements (the rough equivalent of states): Charente-Maritime on the Atlantic coast
and, just inland from that, Charente. (Besides Cognac, this part of France is renowned for
its butter, snails, and fleur de sel, the finest type of natural French sea salt.) Both
départements take their name from the Charente River, which meanders through them, and
on whose banks are the two important towns, Cognac and Jarnac. Cognac, of course, has
given the brandy its name, and about 10 miles (16 kilometers) away, Jarnac, the other hub
of Cognac activity, is home to such prestigious firms as Courvoisier, Hine, and Delamain.
   As the saying goes, all Cognac is brandy, but not all brandy is Cognac. Good-quality
Cognacs can cost $200 or more a bottle, and the dozen or so most expensive cost about
$5,000 a bottle. (The single most expensive Cognac—of which there is only one bottle—is
the Henri IV Dudognon Heritage, valued at 2 million dollars. It was aged in barrel for
more than 100 years and, for good measure, the bottle is dipped in 24-karat gold and
sterling platinum, and decorated with 6,500 diamonds.)
   Poised between the ocean and the Massif Central, where maritime and continental
climates collide, Cognac straddles a northern French climate and a southern one. These
factors, combined with wide variations in the soil, have led Cognac to be divided into six
smaller subdistricts, or crus, each of which produces a Cognac of a different character and
quality. (The name of the subdistrict usually appears on the label; if there is no sub-district
name, then the Cognac is a blend of different crus.) The top three crus, in descending
order of quality, are Grande Champagne, Petite Champagne, and Borderies. The word
champagne here has no relationship to the region of the same name. Rather, champagne in
Cognac derives from the Latin campagna, meaning “open fields,” as distinguished from
the French bois, “woods.” Cognac’s three less-highly-regarded subdistricts, Fins Bois,
Bons Bois, and Bois Ordinaires (“fine woods,” “good woods,” and “ordinary woods,”
respectively) were all once forests. Grande Champagne is indisputably the most renowned
of the districts, and its porous chalky soil is thought to produce the richest-tasting Cognacs
with the most elegance and finesse. (A confusing designation you might come across—
Fine Champagne—is not a subdistrict itself, but rather the term for a Cognac distilled from
wines made exclusively in Grande and Petite Champagne.)
The Rémy Martin distillery, founded in 1724. The house makes its Cognacs from grapes grown in the very best districts
                 within Cognac, the areas known as Grande Champagne and Petite Champagne.


                STORING, SERVING, AND TASTING FRANCE’S
                               SPIRITS
          Cognac and Armagnac are very different from wine when it comes to storing, serving,
          and drinking. First, none of them improve with age after they are bottled; each is ready
          to drink when you buy it. Not drinking the entire bottle immediately, however, presents
          no problem. An open bottle of Cognac or Armagnac will remain in good condition for
          about a year.
             Bottles of Cognac and Armagnac should be stored upright, not on their sides. The
          high alcohol content in the spirits can rot the cork, causing unpleasant aromas to form.
             As for giant balloon snifters, forget them. Impressive as they may appear, such
          snifters dissipate brandy’s aroma, meanwhile propelling alcohol vapors toward you so
          forcefully that you may feel like you’ve been smacked between the eyes. In the regions
          of Cognac and Armagnac, the preferred glass is a relatively small (it should be easy to
          cradle in your hand), chimney-shaped glass with a thin rim. And, all the Hollywood
          portrayals to the contrary, neither the glass nor the spirit should be warmed over a
          flame; direct heating discombobulates the brandy’s aroma and flavors. Generally
          speaking, a 1- to 2-ounce serving is customary.
             Wine tasters commonly plunge their noses into wineglasses and inhale deeply—not
          a good idea with any of these spirits. They are meant to be sniffed gently and at a slight
          distance. Similarly, taking tiny, not large, sips accentuates the spirits’ smoothness.
          Finally, don’t assume that a deep, rich color indicates that the spirit has been aged a
          long time. Caramel is allowed as a coloring agent, enabling some Cognacs and
          Armagnacs to appear older than they really are.

   Cognac is made from the most innocuous of grape varieties. The leading one by far is
ugni blanc, which in the Cognac region is called St.-Émilion, even though it has nothing to
do with the wine district of that name in Bordeaux. Colombard and folle blanche are used
in much smaller amounts. (By law, six other varieties—sémillon and five very obscure
varieties—may also be included, but none can account for more than 10 percent of the
grapes grown and used.) All of these grapes are grown to produce enormous yields,
resulting in a thin, high-acid blended wine that is barely palatable on its own. Distillation
changes everything. Indeed, a high-acid blend is ideal for distillation, for acidity
contributes to the brandy’s structure.




 The vineyards of Cognac stretch over the bucolic landscape north of Bordeaux. This is pastoral France at her best. In
                                      Cognac, time takes on another dimension.

   Distillation involves boiling a liquid and then condensing the vapors that form. These
condensed vapors are a highly concentrated form of the original liquid. The first distillers
were Egyptians who, as early as 3000 B.C., used crude stills to make perfumes. But in the
Cognac region, distillation—and the birth of Cognac as we know it today—was the result
of Dutch intervention. From the end of the Roman Empire until the sixteenth century, the
area surrounding the Charente River was known for neutral-tasting wine, most of it white
and low in alcohol. The Dutch traded in the area, primarily for salt, and despite their
disappointment with the wine’s proclivity to deteriorate during the sea voyage, they began
to purchase it and ship it to England and other northern countries. Eventually, to delay the
deterioration, they began to distill the wine once it reached the Netherlands, and then sell
the more durable result, which they called burnt wine—brandewijn. By the seventeenth
century, the Dutch began to install stills in the Charente region itself. Today more than
three hundred firms distill Cognac, although just six—Hennessy, Martell, Rémy Martin,
Camus, Otard, and Courvoisier—account for about 90 percent of the sales.
    Cognac is distilled twice (unlike most of the world’s other brandies) in small copper pot
stills, known as alambics charentais. The first distillation produces a cloudy liquid that is
roughly 30 percent alcohol (the brouillis). This is distilled a second time (la bonne
chauffe, literally, the good heating) to produce a clear Cognac that is 70 percent alcohol, or
140 proof, about twice what it will be once it’s bottled. During each distillation the
distiller must expertly make la coupe, the cut, separating the “heads,” the liquid distilled
first, and the “tails,” what is distilled last, from the coeur, or “heart.” The heads and tails
contain off odors and flavors; only the heart is used to make Cognac.
   The heart at this point is a clear, rather harsh brandy traditionally called eau-de-vie
—“water of life.” What transforms this into Cognac is long aging in moderately large
barrels that hold between 71 and 119 gallons (270 and 450 liters) and are made of oak
from one of two famous French forests, Tronçais or Limousin. Immediately as it leaves
the still, the brandy is put into barrels (either new or old depending on the firm’s
preference for intense or delicate flavors). Left in these barrels for years, the water in the
brandy gradually evaporates, as does, usually to a lesser extent, the alcohol. Between 2
and 5 percent of pure alcohol, called the angel’s share, evaporates from each barrel each
year. (Given the vast number of barrels in the region, it’s estimated that about 20 million
bottles’ worth of brandy evaporates yearly.) During this process, the level of humidity in a
firm’s huge barrel-holding warehouse, or chai, is crucially important. Too little humidity
and the brandy loses its alcohol more slowly because more water evaporates. This hardens
and dries out the brandy. Too much humidity and the Cognac will be flabby and lack
structure. The perfect level of humidity is found right beside the Charente River, where
many of the old warehouses are located. Throughout the process of evaporation and
concentration, the brandy is also acted on by oxygen, which, through numerous natural
chemical reactions, causes the brandy to soften and become more fragrant. All the while,
the brandy is also absorbing the subtle vanilla and crème brûlée–like flavors of the oak,
and taking on a rich brownish amber color.
   Although the brandy progressively loses alcohol as it rests in the barrel, it does so
slowly. Its strength must still be brought down to the level stipulated by law for bottling,
40 percent alcohol, or 80 proof. This is done by gradually adding distilled water to the
brandy as it ages in barrel, or by adding faible, a weak mixture of distilled water and
Cognac that has been aged.
   Unlike most wines, most Cognacs are expected to be consistent year after year, so most
don’t carry a vintage date. Each Cognac firm achieves consistency by a complex and
continual process of blending different lots of brandy, each of which may be a different
age. In practice, many brandies are aged in barrels for twenty-five to sixty years. (After
sixty years, most brandy is thought to decline rather than improve.) It’s said that no truly
great Cognac can be produced without including a proportion of very old brandy, which
contributes a pungent, earthy character known as rancio.
   When a Cognac firm advertises that its Cognac has been aged thirty-five years, that
figure is the average age of all the brandies that went into the blend. This is not, however,
what you will see on the label. Such label designations as XO or VSOP refer to the
youngest eau-de-vie in the blend, not the average age of all of them. In Courvoisier XO,
for example, the youngest eau-de-vie must be aged six-and-a-half years. (The average age
of the eaux-de-vie in this Cognac, however, is thirty-five to fifty years. The average age of
the eaux-de-vie in any Cognac blend does not appear on the label.)
   Here are the lengths of time the youngest eau-de-vie in a Cognac blend must be aged in
barrel:
VS (VERY SUPERIOR) OR THREE STAR (***):   not less than two-and-a-half years
VSOP (VERY SUPERIOR OLD PALE), VO (VERY OLD), AND RÉSERVE:      at least four-and-a-half
years
XO (EXTRA OLD), NAPOLÉON, EXTRA, VIEUX, VIEILLE RÉSERVE, AND HORS D’AGE:      at least six-
and-a-half years
   As for vintage Cognacs, although they’re a rarity, they do exist. Initially prohibited by
law, they were often made anyway by houses who set aside lots of especially good
harvests to watch the evolution of those brandies. In 1987 French law changed, and
vintage Cognac is now legal. To prevent fraud, barrels of vintage Cognac must be aged in
special locked cellars, which can only be opened with two keys, one of which is kept by
the government, the other by the Cognac firm.
   At its best, Cognac should taste complex, balanced, and smooth, and have long-lasting
aromas and flavors that subtly suggest flowers, citrus, honey, vanilla, smoke, and earth.
Among the top Cognacs (their average age is noted in parentheses) are: A. de Fussigny
Fine Champagne Vieille Réserve (thirty years); A. E. Dor XO (twenty-five years);
Courvoisier XO (thirty-five to fifty years); Delamain Très Vénérable (forty-five to fifty
years); Martell Extra (forty to fifty years); Rémy Martin XO (twenty-two years); and Hine
Triomphe (forty to fifty years).

      About 20 million bottles’ worth of Cognac—called the angel’s share—
      evaporate annually.
                                                                             ITALY

         PIEDMONT | VENETO | FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA | TUSCANY
 TRENTINO-ALTO ADIGE | LOMBARDY | LIGURIA | EMILIA-ROMAGNA | UMBRIA | ABRUZZI | THE
 SOUTHERN PENINSULA: CAMPANIA, APULIA, BASILICATA, AND CALABRIA | SICILY AND SARDINIA
ITALY RANKS SECOND AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE ITALIANS DRINK
AN AVERAGE OF 13 GALLONS (50 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

In Italy, making wine—like eating or breathing—is so utterly natural it almost seems
instinctive. Grapevines grow everywhere; they are Italy’s version of the American lawn.
There is simply no region, no district, virtually no cranny of the country that does not
produce wine. The numbers are astonishing: 1.9 million acres (769,000 hectares) of
vineyard; 384,000 wineries; and some 377 different grape varieties cultivated (more
varieties than in any other country), leading to a dizzying number of wines.
  Wine at this order of magnitude can seem unfathomable—but of course, not all of these
wines are considered to be of major importance. Scores of Italian wines are simple
quaffing wines consumed almost entirely in or near the villages where they are made.
    The Italian wines that knowledgeable wine drinkers get excited about come
predominantly from a few major areas. These include Piedmont, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia
Giulia, and Tuscany. I’ll cover these in the most depth, but I’ll also provide overviews of
numerous other wine regions. North to south, these include Trentino-Alto Adige, the
Alpine home of some of Italy’s most pristine white wines; Lombardy, the source of Italy’s
best sparklers; Liguria, the crescent-shaped region known for wines that are easily paired
with fresh seafood; Emilia-Romagna, one of the greatest regions in the world for food, and
the birthplace of cheerful, fizzy lambrusco; Umbria, the home of dry, refreshing Orvietos;
Abruzzi (the English name for Abruzzo), memorable for such soft, thick, mouthfilling reds
as montepulciano d’Abruzzo, a wine just waiting to be paired with rustic pasta dishes; and
finally, Italy’s most southern regions: Campania, Apulia, Basilicata, and Calabria, plus the
islands of Sicily and Sardinia, all of which are sources of delicious wines that are good
values, and several make wines from rare, ancient grape varieties as well.
            CHAOS ON THE BOTTLE—ITALIAN WINE LABELS
 To learn about Italian wine, it is necessary to abandon yourself to the chaos of Italian wine labels. Here’s
 one: Feudi di San Gregorio Piano di Montevergine Riserva Taurasi. Okay, um… This happens to be a
 delicious wine, but unless you already know what’s what, it’s nearly impossible to look at a label like this
 and understand it. And also understand what it doesn’t say. For example, this label does not mention the
 grape variety used to make the wine (it’s aglianico; you’d just have to have that part memorized).
 Moreover, who is the producer here? To drive one really crazy, the name of the producer, the name of the
 estate or villa, the name of the brand, and the proper name of the wine may all be listed. (In this case, by
 the way, the name of the producer is Feudi di San Gregorio).
    Even the simplest Italian wine labels can be confusing, because sometimes the wine may be named
 after the grape variety used to make it (such as barbera) and at other times named after the place where
 the grapes grew (such as Barolo). To make matters even more internecine, the names of some Italian
 wines (and even some grapes) combine both grape and place. The wine named montepulciano
 d’Abruzzo, for example, pairs montepulciano, the grape, with Abruzzo, the place. And, you’d just have to
 know that that wine is different from the wine vino nobile di Montepulciano, which isn’t made from
 montepulciano at all (it’s made from sangiovese). And finally, with characteristic Italianness, some Italian
 vintners simply abandon the whole system and just give the wine a fantasy name like “W… Dreams,” the
 name of a famous Friulian chardonnay (it’s up to you to figure out what it means).


      The ancient Greeks called Italy Oenotria, the land of wine.




       St. Peter’s Square in Vatican City. The Vatican consumes more wine per capita than any other country.

   Although wine and food are inextricably linked in most parts of the world, in Italy they
are fervently wedded. Wines that seem slightly lean, tart, or bitter to some are highly
appreciated by the Italians precisely because they have the grip and edge to slice through
the dauntless flavors of Italian food. But it goes even further than that. In Italy, wine is
food. Not so long ago, a daily supply of basic village wine cost Italians less than their
daily supply of bread, according to Italian wine expert Burton Anderson, and both were as
essential to an Italian diner as a fork and knife (probably more so). Along with olive oil,
wine and bread make up what the Italians call the Santa Trinità Mediterranea—the
Mediterranean Holy Trinity. An Italian friend once summed up the special affinity
between Italian wine and food this way: “In Italy, if someone drinks a little too much
wine, the Italians don’t say he has drunk too much; they say he hasn’t eaten enough food
yet.”




 Villa Sparina in the Gavi DOC in Piedmont, which lies over the foothills of the Alps. Go 736 miles (1,185 kilometers)
                            south, and you can stand on Italian soil and see North Africa.


                            THE VATICAN: IN VINO VERITAS
           Vatican City, with a population of fewer than one thousand people, confined in a mere
           .27 square mile (.7 square kilometer) within Rome, consumes more wine per capita
           than any other country in the world—more than 16 gallons (61 liters) per person in
           recent years. By comparison, U.S. per capita consumption is about 3 gallons (11 liters).
           The Vatican’s voluminous wine usage is, in part, the result of an important Catholic
           ritual—the celebration of the Holy Eucharist, in which bread and wine are consecrated
           during Mass and thus believed to be transubstantiated into the body and blood of Jesus
           Christ.

   Italian wines can vary substantially in flavor, texture, and body—even when the wines
being compared are the same type. Two Chianti Classicos from estates less than a half
mile apart can taste remarkably dissimilar. Some of this variability is due to differences in
winemaking, for Italy is a country of fiercely maintained ancient traditions and, at the
same time, extremely sophisticated modern methods. But an equally compelling reason is
this: Italy is a tangle of different, tiny mesoclimates that powerfully influence the character
of any given wine.
    What creates those mesoclimates? The geography and variable climates of the land
itself. You can stand on Italian soil and look at the Alps, but you can also stand on Italian
soil and look at North Africa. The country is about 40 percent mountains (even Sicily has
them!) and another 40 percent hills. As any drive from one village to the next proves,
straight lines don’t seem to exist in this country. The combined zigzagging slopes of hills
and mountains, plus the close proximity of four seas (the Tyrrhenian, Adriatic, Ligurian,
and Mediterranean), plus the geologic impact of numerous earthquakes has produced an
almost pointillistic profusion of environments in which grapes grow.




Men and women harvest chardonnay at Ferrari in Trentino-Alto Adige. The winery, founded in 1902, has become one of
                 Italy’s top producers of metodo classico (Champagne method) sparkling wine.


       In Italy, if someone drinks a little too much wine, the Italians don’t say he has
       drunk too much; they say he hasn’t eaten enough food yet.

   Although Italy’s most revered wines are known worldwide, the grape varieties that
constitute them are rarely found outside the country. You won’t find sangiovese, the
leading grape of Chianti, or nebbiolo, the grape that makes Barolo, growing in France,
Spain, or Australia (except perhaps as an oddity). Even in the United States, the brief, so-
called “Cal-Ital movement” of the late 1980s and early 1990s has been largely abandoned
as California wineries have acknowledged that Italy grows her own indigenous grapes so
much better.

                                      THE ULTIMATE GIFT
           In ancient Rome, wine was linked with authority. Of all the pleasures and privileges of
           power, none was rated more highly than the possession of a vineyard. The highest
           favor bestowed by the Roman emperor Julian was the gift of a vineyard prepared—
           actually planted and pruned—by his own hands.

   As of the 1980s, the Italians, however, adopted cabernet sauvignon and other
international varieties with lightning speed and total confidence. (The first wave of
cabernet sauvignon plantings in Italy actually occurred in the late eighteenth century,
although the appeal of this uva francesca—French grape, as the Italians called it—was
initially found to be limited.) Today, Italian wine is a dual world where ancestral grape
varieties and contemporary grape varieties easily exist side by side.
                          HOW THE ITALIANS EAT PASTA
Pasta became commonplace in Italy in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Early pasta dishes all had
a similar sauce: melted butter and some type of hard cheese, such as Parmigiano-Reggiano. To make
the dish even more special, the pasta would often be sprinkled with sugar and spices as well. (Tomato
sauces did not appear until sometime after the tomato was brought from the New World, in the sixteenth
century.) The difficulty of eating buttery pasta with the fingers may have contributed to the early use of
the fork in Italy.
   Watch Italians eat slender pasta, such as spaghetti, and you will not see them twirling the strands
around a fork set into the bowl of a spoon. Italians eat pasta with a fork only. The correct technique
involves stabbing some pasta near the edge of the bowl, usually at the twelve o’clock position (not in the
center of the mound), and then twirling the fork while bracing it against the inside rim of the bowl. It’s
considered appropriate to have a few strands hanging down from the fork as you lift it to your mouth.
   The American habit of twirling the fork against a soup spoon is thought to have originated around the
turn of the twentieth century, when poor Italian immigrants came to the United States and found bountiful
supplies of affordable food. As the ratio of sauce to pasta increased, a spoon became necessary to
scoop it all up. Inevitably, someone got the cunning idea of using the spoon to assist in eating the pasta
as well.




                            In Italy, pasta and wine are made with a loving hand.
                ITALY’S FINE WINE REVOLUTION

To gain insight into Italian wine today and to understand the revolution in quality that
Italian wine underwent in the latter part of the twentieth century, it’s important to
understand something of the history that led up to Italy’s current wine laws. (For the laws
themselves, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 924). Admittedly, governmental
regulations usually make for pretty dry reading but, in Italy’s case, it’s almost impossible
to comprehend the country’s wines without a grasp of how the wines are categorized by
the Italian government and by the Italians themselves.
                                                GRAPPA
 You can always tell when Italians don’t want the night to end. Out comes the grappa. This, in turn,
 causes everyone to recount their most infamous grappa-drinking stories—which leads to the pouring of
 more grappa, which leads to more stories. Although today grappa is made and drunk all over Italy,
 historically it was a specialty of the northern part of the country, where a small shot in the morning coffee
 helped one get going on a freezing day.
    Grappa is the clear brandy that results when grape pomace (the pulpy mash of stems, seeds, and
 skins left over from winemaking) is refermented and distilled. Depending on the quality of the raw
 material and the method of distillation, the final product can taste as though a grenade has just ignited in
 your throat, or it can taste smooth, winey, and powerful. Ue, a softer, lighter type of grappa invented and
 made famous by the firm Nonino, is a distillate of actual grapes rather than pomace. And grappa di
 monovitigno is a grappa from a single grape variety, such as riesling, moscato, gewürztraminer, or picolit.
 These grappas are considered superior because the result carries a faint suggestion of the aroma and
 flavor of the original grapes. Expensive and rare, such grappas incite cult worship. In fact, grappa fans
 are called tifosi di grappa, a phrase that implies almost feverish allegiance (the word tifosi also refers to
 people suffering from typhoid).
    The bottles are part of the attraction. Since the late 1980s, the dazzling, avant-garde designs of
 grappa bottles have been nothing less than astounding. No northern Italian enoteca is without an
 astonishing display of these elegant bottles, each holding a grappa that looks far more innocent than it
 tastes.




              When grappa seems like a good idea, it usually means I should have already gone home.

   Italy’s wine revolution was provoked by a set of regulations defining the areas where
specific wines can be made. These laws—Denominazione di Origine Controllata,
Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita, and Indicazione Geografica Tipica—
are known by their acronyms, DOC, DOCG, and IGT. More than 330 wine zones have
been designated as DOCs and 73 as DOCGs, yet the wines from these zones, widely
regarded as many of the best wines in the country, represent only a small percentage of all
the Italian wines produced. Some 118 wine areas have been named IGTs, a more humble
designation. (These same laws are the ones that ensure that cheeses such as Parmigiano,
hams such as prosciutto, condiments such as balsamic vinegar, and a host of other foods
can come only from their designated traditional areas.)




 Piero Antinori and his successors—daughters Albiera, Allegra, and Alessia. The family has been in the wine business
                   since Giovanni di Piero Antinori joined the Florentine Guild of Vintners in 1385.

       Most Italians think about wine the way they think about a Ferrari. It ought to
       be red. That said, white wines account for 50 percent of the production of
       Italian wine, and most of the best of those come from the northeastern part of
       the country, bordering the Alps.

    The story behind these pivotal regulations begins in the 1960s. Although great wine
families, such as the Antinoris, Frescobaldis, Contini-Bonacossis, and Boscainis, had all
been making fine wine for centuries, many Italian wines were still the product of peasant
winemaking. But with the enactment of the DOC laws in 1963, an official regulation
stipulated standards for certain types of wine. The first wine given DOC status was the
Tuscan white vernaccia di San Gimignano, in 1966. The course of Italian wine changed
dramatically.
   No sooner had the DOC commandments been handed down than innovative Italian
winemakers began to chafe against them. As comprehensive and protective as the DOC
laws sought to be, they failed to take into consideration a key reality—advances in wine
quality often come through creativity, innovation, and the introduction of new techniques.
The DOC stipulations for any given type of wine were formed around what was traditional
practice in that region. Traditional practice reflected traditional taste. And traditional taste
was, in many cases, that of palates rarely exposed to anything more than the wine from
vineyards within a 20-mile (32-kilometer) radius. By the 1970s, Italian winemakers were
restless.
   Piero Antinori, head of a centuries-old Tuscan winemaking family and a prominent
force within the Italian wine industry, made the first well-publicized break with DOC
regulations in 1971. Antinori’s wine, called Tignanello, was modeled after a wine that
virtually no one had ever heard of or tasted: Sassicaia. Although Sassicaia was made in
Tuscany, it was neither a Chianti nor any other familiar type of Tuscan wine. It wasn’t
even based on the traditional Tuscan grape, sangiovese. Sassicaia was a cabernet
sauvignon; the inspiration behind it was French Bordeaux. Sassicaia was then a quiet,
“underground” project, but Antinori knew about it because his cousins were its creators
(see the section on Tuscany, page 382).




   The 1974 vintage of Castello di Nipozzano Chianti Rufina Riserva, aging gracefully in the cellars of Marchesi de
                                                   Frescobaldi.

   Like Sassicaia, Antinori’s Tignanello was made in the Chianti region, but it was not—
as far as the Italian government was concerned—a Chianti, since it had not been made
according to the DOC regulations. Therefore, like Sassicaia, it could officially be
considered only a vino da tavola (table wine), the lowest status an Italian wine can hold.
Tignanello and Sassicaia thus became the first two vini da tavola to cost a small fortune in
an ocean of vini da tavola that cost peanuts. None of this seemed to bother wine drinkers
or the wine press, who bestowed on these wines (and the others like them that followed)
their lasting nickname, the Super Tuscans.
   Then, in 1980, just as the first steps toward better-quality wine were being taken in
many parts of Italy, the government enacted the DOCG—Denominazione di Origine
Controllata e Garantita—for wines of exceptional quality and renown. The DOCG
regulations were even more strict than the DOC. The first four DOCGs were brunello di
Montalcino and vino nobile di Montepulciano, in Tuscany; and Barolo and Barbaresco, in
Piedmont, all designated in 1980. By 1999, there were twenty-one DOCGs. And by 2013,
there were, as mentioned, seventy-three.
  Most of the initial DOCGs were red. Alas, the first of the white DOCGs, albana di
Romagna, granted in 1987, made the government look silly. Albana, a fairly neutral wine
from the Emilia-Romagna region, comes nowhere close to being one of Italy’s top white
wines. Albana’s status as the first white DOCG threw a cloak of suspicion over the whole
system.
   A more serious flaw in the DOCG, however, was the misleading word garantita
(guarantee) in its title. In fact, the DOCG designation does not guarantee the quality of the
wine. A DOCG is applied to an entire region. Both the greatest wine in that region and the
worst get to say they are DOCG.
   Finally, neither the DOC nor DOCG addressed the growing number of creative,
nonconformist Italian wines, many of which came from places outside DOC and DOCG
wine areas, and all of which continued to be officially considered mere vini da tavola.
Therefore, in 1992, the third designation, Indicazione Geografica Tipica (Typical
Geographic Indication), was created. While IGT wine zones include many places that
make good, even great, wines, they are places that historically have never been considered
as prestigious as the areas awarded DOC and DOCG status. Most IGT wines are the
equivalent of French vins de pays, or country wines.
    So what does all this mean in the end? From a practical standpoint, knowing that a
wine has IGT, DOC, or DOCG status doesn’t guarantee that that particular wine will be
exemplary. Nor are these designations a classification system (like, say, the Grand
Cru/Premier Cru classification of Burgundy, France). But Italy’s designations are a tip-off
to the places that are recognized for the quality or prestige of their wines. Think of the
designations as forming a pyramid of Italy’s wines. Vini da tavola constitute the broad
base; IGT are next, in the middle; DOC wines are nearer the top; and DOCG wines are at
the apex. Fantastic wines are to be found at every level.
PIEDMONT

Lying in a remote white amphitheater created by the Alps, Piedmont is Italy’s preeminent
wine region. Barolo and Barbaresco—two of the country’s most legendary and serious
reds—are born here. (So is the world’s least serious sparkling wine, the playful spumante
known as Asti.)
   If Italy is sometimes thought of as the cradle of Bacchanalian frivolity, you’d never
know it in Piedmont. Winemakers here are prudent and diligent about their work. Shake a
Piedmontese vintner’s hand, and it’s the rough, heavy, calloused hand of someone who has
worked forever in a vineyard. The winemaking style in Piedmont (as well as the culinary
traditions of the region) has strong links to that of their closest neighbor, France. Indeed, if
Piedmont has an enological soul mate, it is not Tuscany, as one might expect, but France’s
Burgundy. In both regions, wine estates are meticulously cared for and mostly small (the
average vineyard estate in Piedmont is 3 to 5 acres/1.2 to 2 hectares). The wine traditions
of both were firmly molded by centuries of monastic (Benedictine) rule. Most important
of all, Piedmont and Burgundy share the philosophic belief that great wine is the progeny
of a single, perfectly adapted grape variety (nebbiolo in Piedmont; pinot noir in
Burgundy). This is in complete opposition to most of the rest of Italy, and indeed most of
France, where wines tend to be made from a blend of grapes.
   It’s difficult to describe just how esteemed Piedmont’s leading wines Barolo and
Barbaresco are, not just in Piedmont, but in Italy as a whole. At their best, these wines are
supremely complex and riveting. But Barolo and Barbaresco are also lauded because
nebbiolo, one of the world’s most site-specific grape varieties, is, in terms of viticulture
and winemaking, one of the most difficult to master. Indeed only 8 percent of all plantings
in Piedmont are nebbiolo. Yet no place in the world has more nebbiolo than this one place,
and no place in the world has had more success with this complicated, demanding,
challenging grape.
  Old Italian farms usually engaged in “promiscuous agriculture.” Each farm would have vineyards, orchards, olive
groves, vegetable gardens, and livestock—everything a family needs to subsist on. Here, barbera vineyards on a farm in
                                          the Monferrato hills of Piedmont.


                              THE QUICK SIP ON PIEDMONT
           TWO OF ITALY’S MOST MAJESTIC, powerful red wines—Barolo and Barbaresco—
           come from Piedmont. Like great red Bordeaux, they can be and often are aged a
           decade or more before being drunk.
           BAROLO AND BARBARESCO are made from the nebbiolo grape, a highly sitespecific
           variety known for its forceful tannin.
           PIEDMONT is also known for Asti—a playful, delicious, semisweet sparkler that is the
           complete opposite of serious Barolo and Barbaresco.

   Like the great red Bordeaux, Barolo and Barbaresco are highly structured, expensive
wines that can be aged for years, even decades. Until the 1990s, Piedmontese winemakers
routinely advised waiting no less than fifteen years, and sometimes as many as twenty-five
years, before drinking them. Today most Barolos and Barbarescos are made in a way that
renders them softer (but not soft, exactly) at a younger age, and thus enjoyable earlier.
Still, as we’ll see, Barolo and Barbaresco are not casual, happy wines. They aren’t good
for taking to the beach. They aren’t good with salads. But in their cultural context, the
wines make utter sense. These formidable, firm, black-red wines are meant for
carnivorous drama—for whole roasted pigs or lambs—or with grand pastas showered with
white truffles and costing a ransom.
   Needless to say, Barolo and Barbaresco are decidedly not what the Piedmontese drink
with dinner every night. That distinction goes to two other red wines that stand next in the
hierarchy of importance: barbera and dolcetto. Barbera, made from the barbera grape, is a
vibrant, sometimes rustic wine, oozing with a wealth of fruit flavors. The grape is
Piedmont’s most widely planted variety, but genetic research suggests it was probably
brought there from someplace else. Dolcetto is a juicy quaffing wine and often has an
attractive, bitter edge. It’s made from the dolcetto grape.
   In addition to these important wines, there are a number of others that, like Barolo and
Barbaresco, are made from nebbiolo, although they are usually less polished, less
complex, and generally more rough and lean. The best known and most important of these
wines is Gattinara, followed by Ghemme, nebbiolo d’Alba, and wines called spanna,
spanna being a synonym for nebbiolo.
   Piedmont is also home to four principal white wines: the dry whites Gavi and arneis;
the slightly sweet, refined moscato d’Asti; and, as already mentioned, the irrepressibly
popular semisweet sparkler Asti.
     THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Piedmont, meaning “foot of the mountain,” is the largest region of the Italian mainland.
As its name suggests, Piedmont is comprised of mountains and rolling foothills. Since
much of this land is too steep or too cold for vines, Piedmont, despite its size, is not Italy’s
leading producer of wine. If only fine wines are considered, however, it excels. More than
15 percent of all the DOC and DOCG wines in Italy are made here. (This is more than any
other region except for Tuscany.) Indeed, 84 percent of all the wines made in Piedmont are
either DOC or DOCG.
    Nearly all of Piedmont’s best vineyards are located in the eastern and southern parts of
the region, where it is warmer than in the more Alpine northern part. The best vineyards
lie over two hilly, southeastern ranges known as the Langhe (from lingue—tongue—a
reference to the mountains, which are said to be shaped like tongues) and Monferrato.
Here are found the important wine towns of Alba, Asti, and Alessandria. Of them, the
most treasured is Alba.

                THE MOST IMPORTANT PIEDMONT WINES
                                     LEADING WINES
         ARNEIS white
         ASTI white (sparkling; semisweet)
         BARBARESCO red
         BARBERA red
         BAROLO red
         DOLCETTO red
         GAVI white
         MOSCATO D’ASTI white (semisweet)

                                     WINES OF NOTE
         GATTINARA red
         GHEMME red
         NEBBIOLO D’ALBA red
         SPANNA red

    The tiny villages of Barolo and Barbaresco (from which the wines take their names) lie
about a dozen miles (19 kilometers) apart on either side of Alba, which, despite being a
rather humble town, holds an almost mythic place in the minds of food and wine lovers—
not solely for mighty Barolo and Barbaresco, but also for the world’s most astonishing
white truffles, which are unearthed here each fall. Just imagining autumn in Alba—
drinking sumptuous Barolos and dining on homemade taglierini generously mounded (this
is Piedmont, after all) with white truffles—is enough to send shivers up my spine.
                              THE GRAPES OF PIEDMONT
                                               WHITES
 ARNEIS: Makes a bold, fresh wine of the same name. The variety, once nearly extinct, was rediscovered
 and “rescued” in the late 1960s and is now planted mainly in the Roero area north of Barolo.
 CORTESE: Source of the dry, crisp, but neutral-tasting wine Gavi.
 MOSCATO: The Italian word for muscat. In Piedmont, the main type of muscat used is muscat blanc à
 petits grains, an ancient variety with extremely fruity, floral, and musky aromas and flavors. Used to make
 sparkling Asti and moscato d’Asti. Sometimes called moscato bianco (white muscat) or moscato Canelli
 (Canelli is a reference to the village, south of Asti, which is famous for the grape).

                                                 REDS
 BARBERA: The most widely planted grape in Piedmont; the source of a vibrant, mouthfilling, often
 slightly rustic wine of the same name; it’s a favorite local dinner wine and an easy companion to food,
 thanks to its relatively high acidity and low tannin.
 BONARDA AND VESPOLINA: Two minor blending grapes used with nebbiolo in the wines Gattinara
 and Ghemme.
 DOLCETTO: Makes a simple, fruity quaffing wine also called dolcetto.
 NEBBIOLO: Piedmont’s star grape and one of the most renowned red grapes in all of Italy. Known for
 power, structure, and tannin; makes the legendary reds Barolo and Barbaresco; and is the primary grape
 in Gattinara and Ghemme. In some parts of Piedmont, nebbiolo is known as spanna.

   The soil around Alba is clay, limestone, and sand. The best vineyards, most of which
are planted with nebbiolo, are located on the domes of hills that are tilted south, resulting
in maximum exposure to the sun, and hence ripeness. The names of the vineyards
underscore the sun’s importance. The producer Ceretto, for example, makes a famous
Barolo from a vineyard called Bricco Rocche; in Piedmontese dialect a bricco is the sun-
catching crest of a hill. Similarly, the producer Angelo Gaja makes an extraordinary
Barbaresco from a vineyard called Sorì Tildìn; a sorì is the south-facing part of a slope
where, in winter, the snow melts first.
   Piedmontese vintners are as obsessed with the individual characteristics of vineyards as
are their Burgundian counterparts. Rather than making a single Barolo or Barbaresco,
most top producers make tiny amounts of multiple versions of both, designating each
according to the specific vineyard from which it came (such wines are, not surprisingly,
expensive). In a nod to France, the top vineyards are often referred to as cru vineyards.
Among the most famous Barolo vineyards are Rocche, Cannubi, Cerequio, Brunate, and
Bussia-Soprana. Top Barbaresco vineyards include Rabajà, Sorì Tildìn, and Asili.

      The word nebbiolo derives from nebbia, “fog,” a reference to the thick,
      whitish bloom of yeasts that forms on the grapes when they are ripe (although
      many say the name may also refer to the wisps of fog that envelop the
      Piedmontese hills in late fall when the grapes are picked).

   About 20 miles (30 kilometers) northeast of Alba, the town of Asti will forever be
linked with moscato (muscat blanc à petit grains). Two moscato-based wines take their
names from Asti: the gorgeously refined, low-alcohol wine moscato d’Asti, which the
Piedmontese adore, and the widely popular, slightly sweet sparkling wine Asti, formerly
known as Asti Spumante (a non-collector’s wine if ever there was one). Piedmont’s most
important and most traditional white grape, moscato, accounts for 22 percent of all
plantings in the region.




           Tiny, compact clusters of nebbiolo in the vineyards of the Barolo producer Roberto Voerzio.

    And finally, the town of Alessandria, the farthest east, near the border with Lombardy,
lies in the limestone-laced hills of the Monferrato range. This area is well known for the
red wines barbera and dolcetto.
                     BAROLO AND BARBARESCO

Close your eyes and imagine it is evening in the cold, dark, hard foothills of the Alps. A
fire smolders in the hearth of a stone farmhouse; game is being roasted in the old oven.
Wine in this setting becomes more than wine. It is reassurance; it is solace.
    Barolo and Barbaresco are located in the Langhe hills of southeastern Piedmont. Both
wines can be powerful and both are made solely from nebbiolo, an ancient variety that
originated in Piedmont (or possibly in Lombardy next door) but whose parents are
presumed extinct. Nebbiolo has very specific aromas and flavors, often characterized by
Italian wine experts as “tar and roses,” along with licorice, violets, leather, chocolate,
prunes, and black figs. None of these characteristics emerges gently and in an orderly
fashion from the wines. With most Barolos and Barbarescos, flavors hurl themselves over
you like a stormy ocean wave.
    Grown on steeper, cooler sites, Barolo is generally the more robust, austere, and
masculine of the two wines. Barbaresco tends to be slightly more graceful, even though it,
too, is often described as having brooding power. Another difference concerns supply.
Each year, about a third as much Barbaresco is produced as Barolo. While Barbaresco is
made in three tiny villages—Barbaresco itself, plus Neive and Treiso—Barolo is made in
eleven, the most important of which are Barolo, La Morra, Castiglione Falletto, Monforte
d’Alba, and Serralunga d’Alba. Because Barolo spans a larger number of mesoclimates, it
is said to be more variable in quality and style, from producer to producer, than
Barbaresco.
                                                     GAJA
 No man has heralded the virtues of Piedmont more than the dynamic, ambitious, and inventive Angelo
 Gaja (pronounced GUY-ah). For decades he has traveled around the world, talking about Barbaresco
 and Barolo to every journalist and restaurateur who would listen (and making converts of most of them).
   Gaja’s wines can have spellbinding intensity and power. The best seem not simply great but virtually
 unreal in their ability to be massively opulent and yet finely etched at the same time. They are also
 gaspingly expensive.
    Gaja made his mark with his estate-grown Barbarescos, especially his intense single-vineyard
 Barbarescos called Sorì Tildìn and Sorì San Lorenzo. Later, he bought a famous but rundown property
 outside Alba and began making the now legendary single-vineyard wine called Sperss (dialect for
 nostalgia) in the Barolo region (but not labeled Barolo because it contains a small amount of barbera
 blended in with the nebbiolo).
    For all of his inventive vineyard and cellar practices, Gaja is a traditionalist in his devotion to nebbiolo.
 When he made Piedmont’s first cabernet sauvignon in 1978, he called it Darmagi, in honor of his father.
 In the local dialect, darmagi means “what a pity”; this was what Gaja’s father mumbled every time he
 passed the cabernet vineyard and thought about the nebbiolo vines that had been pulled out to plant the
 cabernet. Although Darmagi was highly praised internationally (as were Gaja’s two chardonnays, Rossj-
 Bass and Gaia & Rey), Gaja maintains that it was merely a marketing ploy. Making a cabernet that could
 rival the great Bordeaux, he says, was just a clever way of drawing the world’s attention to Barbaresco
 and Barolo, and to Piedmont.




  The ancient small town of Barolo gave its name to the wine Barolo, long considered one of Italy’s most magnificent
                                                        wines.

   Until the late 1980s, Barolo and Barbaresco were almost unpalatable unless they had
been aged fifteen to twenty years, whereupon the wines’ fierce tannin might begin to
mellow. Often they required a twenty-five- or thirty-year wait. Daring (or foolish) drinkers
who opened the wines earlier often ended up with tongues that felt as though they’d been
sheathed in shrink-wrap.
    The wines’ severity was the result of several factors. First, nebbiolo is genetically high
in tannin. (The common Barolo descriptor “tarry” is not just a flavor, but a reference to the
way the tannin feels.) Second, and to make matters worse, nebbiolo is a late-ripening
variety, often harvested on the brink of winter when the ambient temperature is cold. Two
problems are embedded here. Late-ripening grapes often don’t get ripe, so the wines,
rather than having a soft texture, end up feeling like sandpaper. In addition, historically,
Piedmont’s small cellars would be very cold by the time the grapes were brought in. As a
result, fermentation would choke along in fits and starts (yeasts work best in warm
environments, not cold ones), often for months, before it got rolling effectively.
Piedmontese winemakers of the past were forced to stand by and let nebbiolo run its
course, even though, in the long process, hard, bitter tannins were extracted from the grape
skins. Many winemakers then inadvertently exacerbated that harshness by leaving the
wine for years in large oak or chestnut casks, often desiccating any little fruitiness the
wine might have had, and sometimes oxidizing the wine in the process.




The vaulted cellars of Ceretto. Historically, Barolo was deemed drinkable only after it had aged 15 to 20 years in barrel.
Today, thanks to improved viticultural and winemaking techniques, the wines are drinkable (but maybe not as heavenly)
                                                when they are far younger.

   As modern tastes swung toward soft, flavorful wines that could be drunk the night they
were bought, consumers began bypassing Barolo and Barbaresco. It seemed as if Italy’s
two greatest wines were on their way to becoming the dinosaurs of fine red wine. But
eventually, using modern technology, winemakers in the 1980s began making Barolos and
Barbarescos that possessed a certain suppleness, even while they remained majestic,
monolithic wines. Most notably, the introduction of temperature-controlled tanks meant
that fermentation could be immediately warmer and quicker, thereby avoiding astringent
tannins. Juice could be pumped over the grape skins in a way that imparted maximum
color to the wine but, again, minimized harsh tannin. Finally, winemakers began to
understand how to divide the aging of nebbiolo between small French barrels and bottles
so that the lush fruit quality of the wine would not be sacrificed. By the 1990s, a new era
for nebbiolo had been born.
   Of course, although most Barolos and Barbarescos are now made to be drunk sooner,
sooner is a relative term. A Barolo or Barbaresco less than five years old may still be
imprisoned by tannin and may taste closed, and not particularly complex. With these
wines, you simply must make yourself wait, for with time, the wines reward you. They
unfurl themselves, revealing layers of flavor and richness of texture that weren’t even
hinted at when the wines were young. Perhaps more than any other wines, Barolo and
Barbaresco need at least half a decade (and a decade is better) to evolve into themselves.




   Finally, by law, Barolo and Barbaresco are among the longest-aged wines in Italy.
Barolo must be aged a total of thirty-eight months, eighteen of which must be in oak, and
for Barolo riserva, the total is sixty-two months, eighteen of which must be in oak.
Barbaresco must be aged a total of twenty-six months, nine of which must be in oak, and
for Barbaresco riserva, the requirement is fifty months of aging, nine of which must be in
oak.
                     SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF BAROLO
 Aldo Conterno • Bruno Giacosa • Ceretto • Domenico Clerico • Elio Altare • Elio Grasso • Gaja • Giacomo
 Conterno • Giuseppe Mascarello • Giuseppe Rinaldi • Luciano Sandrone • Luigi Einaudi • Marcarini • Paolo
                           Scavino • Renato Ratti • Roberto Voerzio • Vietti

                 SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF BARBARESCO
  Bruno Giacosa • Ceretto • Cigliuti • Gaja • La Spinetta • Marchesi di Gresy • Moccagatta • Renato Ratti •
                                               Sottimano • Vietti
   GATTINARA, GHEMME, NEBBIOLO D’ALBA, AND
                  SPANNA

A slew of wines besides Barolo and Barbaresco are made from nebbiolo, including
Gattinara, Ghemme, nebbiolo d’Alba, and spanna. Nebbiolo d’Alba is slightly different
from the others in that, like Barolo and Barbaresco, it is produced in the famous Langhe
foothills near the town of Alba. But the grapes that go into nebbiolo d’Alba come from
outlying areas and don’t quite have the finesse and power that nebbiolo intended for
Barolo and Barbaresco possesses. Still, nebbiolo d’Alba is a good, lower-priced “starter”
wine before one jumps into the deep end of the pool with Barolo and Barbaresco, and
because it’s less powerful, it doesn’t require the same aging that its more famous sisters
do.
    Gattinara and Ghemme are produced far north of Alba, in colder Alpine foothills with
glacial soil and terrain. Although Gattinara in particular can occasionally seem like a mini
Barolo, with fairly powerful flavors, both Gattinara and Ghemme are generally leaner than
Barolo or Barbaresco, with simpler flavors and tannin that is sometimes aggressive. The
Italians would never drink these wines without food (they’d taste too harsh), and indeed
the wines can taste entirely transformed if drunk with a juicy roast or creamy risotto.
Gattinara and Ghemme are frequently made with a small percentage of bonarda or
vespolina, two minor blending grapes that help tone down and soften the northern-grown
nebbiolo. The best known of these wines in the United States is the Gattinara made by
Travaglini, shipped in an almost square-shaped black bottle.

           DOLCETTO—EAT, DRINK, DO A LITTLE BUSINESS
    Dolcetto, a model of versatility, has been used by the Piedmontese in a number of creative (and
    commercial) ways. The wine is a traditional accompaniment to dishes such as tajarin (thin, gold-colored
    pasta made with up to forty egg yolks) with butter and sage. But the grapes themselves—unlike most wine
    grapes—can also be delicious eaten raw as table grapes. They are even cooked down and made into
    cognà, a jam served with local hard cheeses such as Murazzano, from sheep’s milk, and Castelmagno,
    mainly from cow’s milk. And why not do a little business while you are eating? Historically, the
    commercially savvy Piedmontese also used dolcetto grapes to barter with neighboring Ligurians for their
    famous green-tinged olive oil, salt, and anchovies.
The Vietti family has made stellar single-vineyard Barolos and Barbarescos for decades. But the family’s barbera is the
                    sort of wine that’s so irresistible and delicious you just can’t put the glass down.

   Curiously, in northern Piedmont nebbiolo is called spanna. Thus, both Gattinara and
Ghemme are usually said to be made from spanna, not nebbiolo. Wines labeled simply
with the word spanna are basic wines made from nebbiolo grown in northern Piedmont.
Rustic defines them best.
                                     BARBERA

The word barbera may sound as though it could be related to barbaric, but in reality, this
is Piedmont’s most juicy, straightforwardly delicious red wine. Scan any Piedmontese
restaurant around dinnertime; a bottle of barbera will be on most tables. In many ways,
barbera is the antithesis of Barolo and Barbaresco. It usually does not have hard, tannic
edges, nor does it require super-long aging. Instead of Barolo’s blackish hue, barbera is
almost shockingly magenta. And unlike Barolo and Barbaresco, it is not considered a
classic. Barbera, at its best, is simply a captivating wine with lots of flavor muscle.
   The barbera grape is Piedmont’s most widely planted variety (it was brought to
Piedmont after the phylloxera epidemic and met with good success). Historically it was
grown almost everywhere—everywhere, that is, except in the best soil on the best south-
facing slopes. Those went to Barolo or Barbaresco. In the winery, barbera received
stepsister treatment as well. The best barrels were reserved for Barolo and Barbaresco,
which also got more winemaking attention. Worst of all, barbera was often cultivated for
quantity. Instead of limiting yields, producers stretched them. Given barbera’s second-
class treatment in the past, it’s surprising that the wine was as good as it was.
    In the 1980s, however, the forward-thinking Piedmontese vintners Giacomo Bologna
and Renato Ratti began to view barbera as a diamond in the rough. Planting it on better
sites, they limited yields, vinified it more carefully, and began aging it in small, new
French oak barrels. Quality soared. Today, many producers make very tasty modern
barberas with supple, feltlike textures, and mouthfilling chocolaty, licoricey, cherry, figgy
fruit. And because the barbera grape is naturally high in acid, the wines also have a kind of
vibrancy and zip that make them great counterpoints to food.
          PIEDMONT’S OTHER TREASURE: WHITE TRUFFLES
 I think I can say this: No food in the world is more riveting than the Piedmontese white truffle. Its aroma
 and flavor is, in a word, narcotic. Of the more than seventy species of truffles that can be found
 throughout the world, white truffles are the most cherished and highly sought after. They grow in
 unpredictable spots, a foot or more underground, generally near oak, chestnut, or beech trees. They
 ripen throughout the late fall; their harvest corresponds with that of Piedmont’s grapes.
    No one knows why white truffles grow mainly in Piedmont or why the Piedmontese type is superior in
 flavor to the small quantity that can be unearthed in Tuscany, Umbria, Emilia-Romagna, and Croatia.
 White truffles have never been successfully cultivated, and even in Piedmont, their existence varies
 greatly year to year based on the weather.
    Because white truffles that are buried underground cannot be detected by humans, dogs and pigs are
 trained to sniff them out. The truffle hunter (trifalao) must be careful to pull the animal away at just the
 right moment lest the truffle become pet chow. White truffles are always hunted under the cover of night,
 so that the location of the truffle bed remains secret. This, in turn, is important because white truffles
 command exceedingly high prices—$4,000 to $5,600 per pound most recently—and are bought and sold
 almost like illicit drugs.
    According to research conducted in Germany and England, truffles are profoundly and appealingly
 aromatic because they contain a special substance that is also found in the testes of men and boars.
 This substance is secreted by the sweat glands in a man’s armpit and can be detected in the urine of
 women. Researchers report that the substance has a powerful psychological effect on human beings.




                              Ugly. But to every food and wine lover, a thing of beauty.
    White truffles are ugly things—gray, knobbed balls that look as though they have been deformed by
 some especially evil bit of witchcraft. They range in size from marbles to baseballs, although the larger
 ones are exceedingly rare. And although they are breathtakingly expensive, only a tiny amount is needed
 to transform a dish. In Piedmont, white truffles are shaved raw over homemade pasta, risotto, polenta,
 soft scrambled eggs, veal carpaccio, or veal tartare. The earthy pungency of the truffle seems to intensify
 the earthiness of the Barbaresco or Barolo that is usually served alongside.
    Each autumn in Alba, a truffle market is held under a long medieval arcade. Truffle hunters with scales
 at their sides display their finds. The air is heady with the collective aroma of thousands of truffles.
 Restaurateurs, buying in quantity, have sometimes been accompanied by bodyguards.
    A final note: Tartufi Ponzio, in the center of Alba, is a tiny shop that sells products related exclusively to
 truffles and wine. There are white-truffle oils, pâtés with truffles, truffle sauces, truffle slicers, and so forth,
 plus a small but stunning collection of Piedmontese wines (tartufiponzio.com).

   Today, barbera is grown everywhere in Piedmont, although the two places that
produce most of the outstanding wines are the area around the town of Alba
(barbera d’Alba) and near Asti (barbera d’Asti). A small number of producers have
begun to blend barbera and nebbiolo in the hopes of fusing barbera’s blackberry-
fruit vibrancy with nebbiolo’s structure and complexity. Some of these blends, like
Conterno Fantino’s Monprà, are delicious.
                   SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF BARBERA
  Aldo Conterno • Coppo Camp du Rouss • Elio Altare • Elio Grasso • Gaja • Giacomo Bologna • Giacomo
   Conterno • Giuseppe Mascarello • La Spinetta • Marcarini • Moccagatta • Paolo Scavino • Pio Cesare •
                                     Prunotto • Renato Ratti • Vietti
                                     DOLCETTO

The appealing simplicity of dolcetto (the name means “little sweet”) has caused it to be
misleadingly pegged as Italy’s Beaujolais. In fact, the two wines taste quite different.
Dolcetto, made from dolcetto grapes, has firm, spicy fruitiness set off against a subtle
bitter-chocolate background. Beaujolais, made from gamay, has a grapey fruitiness and at
its best, a minerally edge.
   Dolcetto has relatively little acid, not much tannin, and is lighter in body than barbera,
making it so easy to drink it becomes almost gulpable. It, too, is a favorite every-night
wine in Piedmont, and is often served with the gargantuan Piedmontese antipasto misto.
Though most dolcetto is made to be merely easy-drinking stuff, a few producers make
serious versions—wines with such forthright grip, structure, and depth that they hardly
seem like dolcetto. These producers include Chionetti, Marcarini, and Vietti.
                                               VERMOUTH
 The indispensable ingredient in a martini, vermouth was first created and commercially sold in Piedmont
 in the 1700s. Vermouth is red or white wine that has been infused with a secret blend of more than a
 hundred aromatic spices, barks, bitter herbs, and flavorings, among them angelica, anise, bitter almond,
 chamomile, cinnamon, coriander, ginger, nutmeg, peach, quinine, rhubarb, and saffron. Until it was
 banned in the early twentieth century because of its potential psychoactive toxicity, wormwood was also
 included. In fact, the word vermouth comes from the German wermut, “wormwood.”
    Historically, the Piedmontese used muscat grapes for their base wine, and thus most vermouth was
 white. Today, cheap red or white bulk wine from the south of Italy is usually used as the base, and as a
 result, the quality of vermouth is not as high as it once was. After the wine has been infused, it is then
 fortified to raise the alcohol content to 15 to 21 percent (table wine is usually 12 to 14 percent). Red
 vermouth is generally sweet; white vermouth may be dry or semisweet. Both are consumed solo, as
 aperitifs, or mixed into various cocktails, including Manhattans. The large, commercial vermouth firms,
 such as Cinzano, Martini & Rossi, and Punt e Mes, are all headquartered around Turin, the capital of
 Piedmont.




The Gothic-Romanesque Abbey of Vezzolano in Asti, the region made famous by the semi-sweet sparkler also known as
Asti (once called Asti Spumante). Dizzingly fruity and a joy to drink, Asti is made from moscato (muscat blanc à petits
                                                    grains) grapes.

   Dolcetto is made in selected spots all around Piedmont, but the best wines generally
come from near Alba (dolcetto d’Alba) and from around the small village of Dogliani
(dolcetto di Dogliani), which calls itself the birthplace of dolcetto thanks to sixteenth-
century documents that reference the grape, though the origin and parentage of the variety
has not been established by DNA typing.
                               GAVI AND ARNEIS

In Piedmont, red wine has always been a religion, and white wine, something of a
postscript. Nonetheless, a small number of good (and moderately expensive) white wines
are being made in the region, notably those called Gavi and arneis. Gavi, the wine made
around the village of Gavi, in the southeast, near the border with Liguria, once had more
than just a local reputation. During the 1960s and 1970s, when Italy was in the midst of its
fine wine revolution, many wine experts considered it the best dry white wine in the entire
country. (Pinot grigio, at the time, was considered so characterless it didn’t warrant
consideration.) By the 1980s, however, the stunning whites of Friuli-Venezia Giulia and
Trentino-Alto Adige began to challenge Gavi’s standing, and today they are far more
highly thought of.
    Gavi is made from the cortese grape, presumed to be native to Piedmont, and
mentioned in early-seventeenth-century literature. At its best the wine is bone-dry and
crisp, with citrus and mineral notes—pleasant enough, to be sure. About thirty estates
specialize in Gavi, most in and around the small village of that name. The area’s proximity
to the Ligurian coast, the Italian Riviera, has made Gavi a natural partner for seafood.
   Arneis, which means “rascal” in the Piedmontese dialect, has gone through several
fashion cycles. For decades, plantings were in decline, and there still isn’t very much
produced, but in the mid-1980s arneis began to acquire underground cult status as another
chic match for seafood in fashionable restaurants along the Ligurian coast. The vagaries of
fashion notwithstanding, this can be a delicious wine—dry, lively (like that rascal), and
fairly full in body, with light pear and apricot flavors. Arneis is made mostly in the hills of
Roero, northwest of Alba. The best producers include Vietti, Ceretto, Bruno Giacosa, and
Castello di Neive.
                                                     ASTI

Italy produces sparkling wines from more different grape varieties than any other country
in the world. The best known is Asti, formerly known as Asti Spumante, an aromatic,
semisweet sparkler made from moscato grapes grown all over southeastern Piedmont but
especially around the famous wine towns of Asti and Alba. South of Asti and east of Alba
is the tiny village of Canelli, where Asti production began in the latter part of the 1800s.
The village is such a hub of Asti production that this particular type of moscato is
sometimes called moscato Canelli. It has another name, too—moscato bianco, white
muscat. Both of these names refer to the same grape that in French is known as muscat
blanc à petits grains.
   If everyone in the world were sitting down together for one immense lunch party and
only one wine could be served, a top Asti might be a good choice. The frothy spumante
(the word spumante means “foaming”) is as irresistible as chilled peaches on a hot day.
Yet the wine has anything but a good public relations image. Lots of poorly made,
commercial Asti Spumante exported after World War II gave it a cheap-fizz reputation that
has been slow to die. The best modern Astis are far from that. They are not sugary sweet
like candy but, rather, dizzyingly fruity and evocative of perfectly ripe peaches and
apricots. Plus, there’s the wine’s intriguing muskiness—a hallmark of moscato grapes.
Asti is also quite light—7 to 9 percent alcohol (standard wines are 12 to 14 percent). It
should be served very well chilled—cold, in fact, and in a tall, narrow glass.
   There are dozens of grape varieties that have the word muscat (or moscato) in their
names, and they are some of the oldest vines around the Mediterranean. Indeed, moscato
may well have been the first grape cultivated in Piedmont, although nebbiolo, too, is an
ancient variety. Despite moscato’s long sojourn in Piedmont, its use in sparkling wine is
relatively recent. The first Asti is attributed to Carlo Gancia, who introduced sparkling
wine to the region around 1870. Gancia is still a leading commercial maker of the wine.

                                 BRACHETTO… RUBY FIZZ
    Legend has it that both Julius Caesar and Mark Antony presented gourds of sparkling brachetto to
    Cleopatra, as the wine was an aphrodisiac. While that last idea is hard to fact-check, the sparkler has
    undeniable charm. Brilliant ruby red in color, with intense floral and fruity notes, brachetto is made
    exclusively from brachetto grapes in the Acqui region of Piedmont, hence its full name, brachetto
    d’Acqui. The wine is frizzante (“lightly sparkling”), very low in alcohol, fresh, and loaded with sweet
    raspberry and black cherry flavors. It is the perfect ending to a meal, and is one of the few wines in the
    world that pairs extremely well with chocolate.

   Most Asti is not made according to the traditional (Champagne) method (with
secondary fermentation in the bottle) but by the Charmat, or tank, method. In this type of
fermentation, the grapes are crushed and the must is put in large vats and chilled to near
freezing to prevent immediate fermentation. The wine is then fermented in batches as
needed, which preserves the sensational fruitiness of the grapes. The process takes place in
enormous, pressurized, sealed tanks that trap the natural carbon dioxide gas and cause it to
dissolve back into the wine (the trapped carbon dioxide will become the wine’s bubbles).
When the wine has reached about 7 to 9 percent alcohol, and about 3 to 5 percent of the
natural grape sugar (residual sugar) remains, it is chilled down to stabilize it, centrifuged
to remove all remaining yeasts, and bottled. At that point the sparkler is immediately
shipped, so that it can be consumed at its freshest and liveliest. Asti producers do not
generally put vintage dates on bottles, since the wines for sale should always (you hope)
be from the immediate past harvest.
   Each year, 68 million bottles of Asti are made by a handful of giant companies,
including Cinzano, Contratto, Gancia, Fontanafredda, and Martini & Rossi. In fact, more
than five times as much Asti is made yearly than Barolo.
                                     MOSCATO D’ASTI

Asti’s more prestigious cousin, moscato d’Asti is generally made in tiny batches and in
limited quantities by small Piedmontese producers using selected muscat blanc à petit
grains grapes. Delicate, lightly sweet, and gorgeously fruity, moscato d’Asti is particularly
low in alcohol—no more than 5.5 percent by law (Asti is usually 7 to 9 percent alcohol).
This makes moscato d’Asti a fairly fragile wine, which in turn has made it highly
desirable among Italian wine connoisseurs.
    Moscato d’Asti is also less effervescent than Asti. It is not considered spumante
(foaming) at all, just a bit frizzante (fizzy). Since it is under less pressure than Asti, it is
stoppered with a regular cork, not a sparkling wine cork with a wire cage. Moscato d’Asti
is vintage dated and is served well chilled, generally in regular wineglasses, not flutes. It
should be drunk while fresh, soon after release. In Piedmont it’s traditional to drink a glass
on Christmas morning.
               SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF MOSCATO D’ASTI
   Cascina La Spinetta-Rivetti • Icardi • I Vignaioli di Santo Stefano • Marchesi di Gresy • Vietti Cascinetta
                              THE FOODS OF PIEDMONT

Northern Italian food, including the food of Piedmont, is not what many people imagine it
to be—and for a good historical reason. The great wave of Italian emigrants who left Italy
at the beginning of the twentieth century consisted mostly of extremely poor people from
southern villages. To their new home countries, they brought a modest repertoire of
regional peasant dishes that revolved around pasta, olive oil, tomatoes, and vegetables.
Dishes like “spaghetti and meatballs” were among the immigrant inventions that bore little
resemblance to what was being cooked and eaten in southern Italy itself.
   The cuisines of northern Italy went largely unknown around the world until the past
few decades. And then, their appeal was said to be their lightness. Whoever suggested
that, however, certainly wasn’t thinking about Piedmontese food. Here, hearty, copious
dishes evolved as the logical sustenance of people who lived in the cold shadow of the
Alps and drank robust red wines to keep warm.




Thanks to Piedmont’s cold winters and its inland location on the foothills of the Alps, the local cuisine is meat-based and
                                                         hearty.

   Moreover, Piedmont, on the border of France, was once part of the Kingdom of Savoy.
As the cuisines clanged together, Piedmont adopted the most luxurious French ingredients.
Butter, cream, and eggs are used more extensively here than in any other region of Italy,
with the possible exception of Emilia-Romagna.
   Perhaps the most startling difference between the cooking of Piedmont and that of the
rest of Italy is the prominence of meat. In no other region are diners presented with such
he-man-size hunks of roasted game, veal, and lamb. Remarkably, the carnivorous feast is
usually preceded by a herculean Piedmontese antipasto misto—a series of up to twenty
dishes (egg frittatas, sausages with beans, veal tartare, and so on) that could feed at least a
dozen people more than are at the table.
   One of the single most compelling Piedmontese appetizers is bagna cauda (literally,
“hot bath”), a hearty fall specialty always served during the grape harvest. Extra virgin
olive oil, butter, anchovies, and garlic are whisked together, heated to near boiling, and
served with a variety of vegetables that you dip in the hot oil. These include cardoons (a
member of the artichoke family), red peppers, fennel, leeks, radishes, onions, cabbage,
beets, and bitter lettuces. Bread is put to use as an edible plate, helping to convey the
vegetables from the pot to the mouth without dripping oil all over the tablecloth.
   The two famous Piedmontese pasta dishes are tagliatelle and agnolotti. Tagliatelle are
long, thin, handmade egg noodles lavishly but simply dressed with nothing more than
melted butter and sage. In the fall, white truffles will be shaved over the pasta, falling like
snow-flakes on top of the glistening yellow strands. (Heaven when accompanied by
Barolo.) Agnolotti are small, half-moon-shaped ravioli, frequently stuffed with veal and
sage, or such vegetables as pumpkin or spinach and, again, drizzled lightly with melted
butter.
    Stretching across the north of Italy is a vast corn and rice belt, with the result that
polenta and risotto are as customary as pasta. Piedmontese risottos, made with rich meat
broths and the region’s earthy wild mushrooms, are irresistible. Polenta (cornmeal as art)
is often pan sautéed in butter and served (like American mashed potatoes) as a foil for
roasts.
   In Piedmontese restaurants, large bread-sticks—grissini—are immediately brought to
the table, lest anyone go hungry in the first few seconds after arrival. These impressive
specimens can be as long as the width of the table, or just big and fat. Baking in general is
more significant in the north thanks to both French and Austrian influences.
   Above all else, however, the food that immortalizes Piedmont is the white truffle—one
of the world’s most rarified specialties and a tribute to Italian hedonism.

                           WHEN YOU VISIT… PIEDMONT
         Virtually all of the best wine estates in Piedmont are small and family-run. Visiting is by
         appointment only. Luckily, most are also within easy driving distance from Alba, a
         charming small town as famous for white truffles as it is for wine. (Late November is
         white truffle season.) Conveniently, many of Piedmont’s best restaurants, such as
         Guido, Boccondivino, Cacciatori, Piazza Duomo, La Rei, and La Ciau del Tornavento,
         are also located in this part of the wine country.
                      The Piedmontese Wines to Know
                                                    WHITES




                                                      VIETTI
                                    MOSCATO D’ASTI | CASCINETTA VIETTI
                                        100% muscat blanc à petits grains
For sheer abandon, nothing beats this wine. The flavor is a juicy riot of peaches, apricots, oranges, and ginger, all
framed by effusive bubbles. I could drink this all day. (I think I really could; it’s only 5.5 percent alcohol.) Much of
the moscato d’Asti made today (especially by very large wine companies) is little more than a cheap, fruity fizz.
But the small-estate moscatos d’Asti made by quality-oriented producers, such as the Vietti family, are wholly
different. Their artisanal flavor and pure scrumptiousness are irresistible. In fact, well-made moscato d’Asti is a
wine nobody doesn’t like.




                                                        GAJA

                                          CHARDONNAY | ROSSJ-BASS
                                                  100% chardonnay
Angelo Gaja makes two delicious chardonnays: Rossj-Bass and Gaia & Rey. Although the latter is more famous
and more voluptuous, the Rossj-Bass is the more pure, high-toned, elegant wine. (The wine is named after Angelo
Gaja’s youngest daughter, Rossana, Rossj for short.) There’s just a hint of oak to enrich the fruit, plus a dense,
creamy pear-nectar quality, always spiked with jazzy, appley acidity.
                                                       REDS




                                                  MARCARINI
                                    DOLCETTO D’ALBA | BOSCHI DI BERRI
                                                    100% dolcetto
Marcarini makes seriously delicious dolcetto from the century-old, pre-phylloxera vineyard known as Boschi di
Berri. The wine is a vibrating bowl full of burstingly ripe, maddeningly red cherries laced with violets and vanilla
crème anglaise. The fruit is effusive, the balance is perfect, the finish is remarkably long, and the crave factor is at
an all-time high.
                                                      VIETTI

                                        BARBERA D’ALBA | SCARRONE
                                                   100% barbera
The spirited Vietti family is intensely hardworking, and their passion shows in their wines. The family members are
considered barbera experts, although their Barolos and even their moscatos are delicious wines full of personality.
They make several single-vineyard barberas and each has explosive, rich fruit. The most profound, refined, and
ageworthy is the Scarrone, which, with even a few years of age, can stop you in your tracks. This is a kinetic
barbera, a barbera where berry, licorice, citrus, leather, and vanilla flavors rage around, tempestlike, in the glass.




                                                       GAJA

                                         BARBARESCO | SORÌ TILDÌN
                                                  100% nebbiolo
Gaja makes a number of stunning Piedmontese wines, including his four Barbarescos, which are the heart and soul
of the winery. Although all are richly flavored, complex wines, the single-vineyard Sorì Tildìn is incomparable. The
sensation of sipping this wine is rather like coming in from the cold and being wrapped up in a warm blanket. The
wine unleashes a torrent of compelling aromas and flavors—violets, chocolate, roses, tar, and figs, and the tannin
broaches silk in its ability to be strong and soft at the same time.
                                                    PIO CESARE

                                                  BARBARESCO
                                                   100% nebbiolo
Founded in 1881, in the center of Alba, the estate of Pio Cesare has been one of the pillars of winemaking in the
Langhe for more than a century. The Barolos and Barbarescos here are especially sumptuous and long, For me, the
Barbaresco is a poem to the earth… to the scents of fallen leaves, tobacco, worn leather, and summer as it descends
into the decay of fall. For all the gentility of the fruit flavors, the wine’s severe and majestic structure is classic
nebbiolo. The grapes for this Barbaresco come in part from the Pio Cesare family’s Il Bricco vineyard, in the
village of Treiso.




                                              LUCIANO SANDRONE

                                         BAROLO | CANNUBI BOSCHIS
                                                   100% nebbiolo
Luciano Sandrone makes some of the most texturally rich Barolos in Piedmont. Indeed, texture is so important to
Sandrone that he heats his cellars during the harvest so that the just-picked nebbiolo grapes can immediately begin
to ferment (yeasts work more quickly in a warm environment), rather than sit for an extended period in contact with
the highly tannic nebbiolo skins. The effect is amazing, especially with Sandrone’s Barolo from the famous
Cannubi Boschis section of the Cannubi vineyard. Suppleness—a word not often used with Barolo—is the right
word here. Plus the flavors—tar, incense, dark plums—soar, giving one the uncanny sense that the wine is
somehow flying across one’s palate.
                                                     CERETTO

                              BAROLO | BRICCO ROCCHE BRICCO ROCCHE
                                                  100% nebbiolo
Bricco Rocche Bricco Rocche (the name of the wine and the name of the tiny, 3.7-acre/1.5-hectare vineyard are the
same) is above all a graceful wine of intense concentration, with a flawless, suede-like texture. The irresistible
aromas of earth, sea salt, dried leaves, incense, and something evocative of the human body are mesmerizing. This
is the most expensive and refined of the three Ceretto single-vineyard Barolos, and it is from extremely steep
vineyards at the crest of a hill. Ceretto produces Bricco Rocche Bricco Rocche only four or five times a decade.




                                             GIACOMO CONTERNO

                                         BAROLO | CASCINA FRANCIA
                                                  100% nebbiolo
One of the most traditional wine estates of Piedmont, Giacomo Conterno still makes some of the greatest Barolos.
No modern hand with oak or fermentation temperatures here, just a very fine sense of how to coax finesse out of
nebbiolo. The effect is dazzling. In great vintages, the Giacomo Conterno wines from the family’s 35-acre (14-
hectare) Cascina Francia estate in Serralunga are beautiful, lingering wines evocative of roses, tar, licorice, sage,
rosemary, and salt. These are Barolos for laying away until, on some dark, cold night, with a roast in the oven, you
can’t bear it any longer.
Venice’s strategic position has afforded it both protection and power. From the 9th to the 12th centuries, it was a key
                          center of trade between western Europe and the Byzantine Empire.
THE VENETO

The leading wine-producing region of the north in terms of volume, the Veneto is, in some
years, the most prolific region in all of Italy. Unfortunately, oceans of Veneto wine are
entirely forgettable, obscuring the fact that the region is also home to some great classics,
such as amarone, considered by many Italian wine experts to be the greatest traditional red
wine of northern Italy.
    Both the Veneto and its beloved city of Venice take their names from the Veneti, the
tribe that settled in the area around 1000 B.C. As one of the leading ports and commercial
centers of the medieval world, Venice was a link between the Byzantine Empire in the
East and the emerging countries of northern Europe. Its trade in wines, spices, and food, as
well as its wealth and accomplishments in art, architecture, and glass production, laid the
groundwork for Venice to become one of the most sophisticated cities in all of Italy.
   From Venice and the Adriatic coast, the plains of the Veneto stretch inland through
fairly flat farmland until they come to the lower foothills of the Alps and the border with
Trentino-Alto Adige in the northwest. Much of this land is fertile and extremely
productive, which helped set the scene for the ambitious scale of viticulture that has
ensued.
   The Veneto’s big-business stance began in the 1960s and 1970s when the region geared
up to produce industrial amounts of the whites Soave and pinot grigio and the reds
Valpolicella and Bardolino. Much of this was intended for the United States and Great
Britain, where undemanding, inexpensive, innocuous Italian wines had begun to sell like
hotcakes.
 Just-harvested black-purple corvina grapes at Bertani Winery. Corvina is the leading variety in many of the Veneto’s
                             best-known red wines, including amarone and Valpolicella.


                            THE QUICK SIP ON THE VENETO
          TWO OF ITALY’S most well-known and widely exported wines come from the Veneto:
          Soave, a white, and Valpolicella, a red. Both are available as low- and high-quality
          wines.
          SOME VENETO WINES, both dry and sweet, are made by a special process known as
          appassimento, which concentrates the sugars in the grapes. The two best known of
          these are the dry red amarone and the sweet red recioto di Valpolicella.
          ONE OF THE VENETO’S MOST POPULAR wines is Prosecco, a very chic, casual
          Italian spumante, and the sparkling wine behind the legendary cocktail, the Bellini.

   It’s tempting, of course, to dismiss the wines just mentioned, for the commercial
version of each can be truly awful. But nothing Italian is ever that simple. Take Soave.
While most of it is a mass-produced liquid with only slightly more flavor than water, there
are a number of quite extraordinary Soaves—wines you’d never guess were Soave if you
didn’t know. Thus, for many Veneto wines, two versions exist: the casual cheap version,
and a giant step up in quality (and price), the really terrific version.
   The Veneto also produces several wines made by a method called appassimento, in
which grapes are spread on mats or left to hang in cool lofts, in order to raisinate and
concentrate them. The dry wine amarone is made this way, as are sweet wines labeled
recioto (as in recioto di Valpolicella). The word recioto derives from recie, dialect for
“ears,” in this case referring to the protruding lobes, or ears of a bunch of grapes. Since
they are the part of the bunch that is most exposed to the sun, the ears often have the ripest
grapes. To make a recioto wine, either the ears or, if they are ripe enough, entire bunches
of grapes are dried until the sugar is very concentrated. When the grapes are fermented, a
percentage of the natural residual grape sugar is allowed to remain in the wine. The wine
that results can be rich indeed. Opulent yet elegant sweet versions of both Soave and
Valpolicella are made in this way.




    Against the backdrop of such extremely well-known wines as Soave and Valpolicella,
you’ll find several Veneto wines with almost cultlike followings. Among them are those of
the producer Maculan, made near the village of Breganze. Maculan was one of the first to
approach chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon with quality (and higher prices) in mind.
But Maculan’s most renowned wine is Torcolato, the most famous dessert wine of the
Veneto. Torcolato is made primarily from native vespaiolo grapes that have been lightly
affected by botrytis and then, after picking, put into special drying lofts and allowed to
shrivel and raisinate (the appassimento method). The wine is gorgeously balanced, with
striking raisin, orange, vanilla, green tea, and roasted nut flavors. The name Torcolato
(“twisted” in Italian) refers to the special way the winery’s workers tie bunches of grapes
with twine, twisting them so that each bunch hangs freely, completely surrounded by air,
ensuring perfect drying.
   Lastly, the Veneto is home to Prosecco, an easy-drinking sparkling wine and the bubbly
that’s traditionally blended with the juice of fresh white peaches to make Venice’s most
famous cocktail, the Bellini.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Though the northern and western parts of the Veneto can be quite mountainous, the region
is less influenced by the Alps than either of its neighbors, Trentino-Alto Adige or Friuli-
Venezia Giulia. Both the Adige and Po rivers, on their way to the Adriatic Sea, flow across
the broad plains of the Veneto, creating large expanses of rich, sun-drenched farmland
where vegetables and fruits, including grapes, grow profusely. Since great wines in
general come not from fertile soil but from the opposite, the Veneto’s best vines tend to be
planted near hills, on well-drained volcanic soil interspersed with sand, clay, and gravel.

                 THE MOST IMPORTANT VENETO WINES
                                   LEADING WINES
         AMARONE red
         PINOT GRIGIO white
         PROSECCO white (sparkling)
         SOAVE white
         VALPOLICELLA red

                                   WINES OF NOTE
         BARDOLINO red
         BIANCO DI CUSTOZA white
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MERLOT red
         RECIOTO DELLA VALPOLICELLA red (sweet)
         RECIOTO DI SOAVE white (sweet)

   The Veneto can be divided into three zones. In the far west, near Lake Garda and the
volcanic mountain range of Monte Lessini, the traditional wines Soave, Valpolicella,
Bardolino, and amarone are produced, as well as Bianco di Custoza, one of those simple
sorts of white wines that taste best when drunk in a bar (the wine, not you) in the region
where they’re made. Verona, the major city, is one of Italy’s wine capitals; each year, the
country’s largest wine fair, Vinitaly, is held here. (Spread over five or more coliseum-size
buildings, the fair includes so many thousands of Italian wines that tasting them all could
take weeks.) In the Veneto’s northern hills above Treviso (held to be the radicchio capital
of Italy), Prosecco is made. What is considered more or less the center of the Veneto, from
Venice to Vicenza, is the source of several different types of wine, ranging from simple
merlots, cabernet sauvignons, chardonnays, and pinot grigios of no particular distinction
(Santa Margherita pinot grigio comes from here) to more exciting wines, especially from
around Breganze, Colli Berici, and Colli Euganei.
                           THE GRAPES OF THE VENETO
                                              WHITES
CHARDONNAY: Can make some attractive New World–style wines, but more often they are merely
decent.
GARGANEGA: Leading grape grown in the Veneto since the Rennaissance. The dominant grape in
Soave, where it is blended with so-called trebbiano di Soave (verdicchio bianco).
GLERA: Probably originally native to the Istrian peninsula (now part of Croatia) near Friuli-Venezia
Giulia’s far eastern border. Today grown almost exclusively in the Veneto. The principal grape in the
popular sparkling wine Prosecco.
PINOT BIANCO: A minor grape in terms of production, but when pinot bianco (pinot blanc) is used, as it
often is, as part of a blend, it contributes good body and character.
PINOT GRIGIO: Also known as pinot gris, pinot grigio makes volumes of decent light wine (with a few
exceptions, most are usually not as good as the pinot grigios of Friuli or the Alto Adige).
TREBBIANO DI SOAVE: Despite its local name, not actually a trebbiano, but rather, the grape
verdicchio bianco. Good-quality grape blended with garganega to make Soave and bianco di Custoza.
TREBBIANO TOSCANO: A neutral-tasting grape used in cheaper versions of Soave and other Veneto
whites.
VESPAIOLA: Native grape. The source of some interesting dry white wines, and more-famous sweet
ones.

                                                REDS
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: With a few notable exceptions, made into relatively insubstantial wines.
CORVINA VERONESE: Leading native red grape. Thanks to its good structure, it’s the lion’s share of the
blend in amarone, Valpolicella, and most Bardolinos. The name may be derived from corvo (“crow,” a
reference to the black color of the grapes).
MERLOT: Mostly made into simple, serviceable, but uninspired wines.
MOLINARA: A minor blending component in the wines amarone, Valpolicella, and Bardolino. Considered
generally lower in quality than corvina and rondinella.
NEGRARA: A minor blending component in the wines amarone, Valpolicella, and Bardolino.
OSELETA: Rare blending grape thought to be extinct but rescued and revived in the 1990s and now
used in very small amounts by some producers in their amarones and Valpolicellas.
RONDINELLA: The second most important grape, after corvina (which is one of its parents), in amarone,
Valpolicella, and Bardolino.
 The fortresslike medieval castle of Soave, built in the 10th century in the western Veneto. The countryside around the
castle is well known for garganega and trebbiano di Soave grapes and the simple, easy-drinking white wine made from
                                                           them.

   As with Friuli and Trentino-Alto Adige, the Veneto was once home to dozens of grape
varieties and many of them are still grown today, though in smaller amounts. In addition to
the international varieties already mentioned, several native grapes are key. The leading
native red grape by far is corvina, more accurately corvina Veronese, the major grape in
amarone, Valpolicella, and Bardolino. Corvina is usually blended with smaller amounts of
rondinella (its progeny), molinara, and sometimes negrara.
    The leading white grape for the traditional wine Soave is an old Veneto variety—
garganega, almost always blended with what is locally called trebbiano di Soave. (While it
may be called a trebbiano, this old Veronese grape has been shown by DNA typing to be
the grape verdicchio bianco.) Then there is vespaiola, a far more rare grape than garganega
or trebbiano, that makes some fascinating wines, especially sweet wines. The grape owes
its name to the word vespa (Italian for “wasp”), because when ripe, the grapes attract large
numbers of these insects.
       A HISTORY OF WINEGLASSES: ITALY’S MAJOR ROLE
From the beginning of time, drinking vessels have taken their inspiration from natural forms: hands
cupped together, the conical horn of an animal, a gourd split into two bowls, a flower and its stem. Such
simple images as these have given rise to an incredible number of objects used throughout history from
which to drink wine. These range from the animal skins of the ancient world to the plastic tumblers of
today.
   But if any one substance was meant to carry wine, it is glass. Wineglasses are not a modern
invention. In the first century B.C., mouth-blown goblets, beakers, and bottles were being made in the
Mediterranean and Near East. These early vessels were extremely precious and rare.
    Remarkably, modern glasses are made in essentially the same way ancient ones were. Basically,
common sand—which contains silica—is combined with ashes from trees—potash. The mixture is then
fired at intense heat—up to 2,500°F (1,371°C)—causing the substances to melt together. After firing, the
molten blob is blown by mouth (or machine) and shaped.
  Glassmaking reached its zenith in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries on the island of Murano,
near Venice, Italy. There, glassmakers were held as virtual captives of their guild. Any glassblower
caught trying to escape from the island or revealing the secret of Venetian glassmaking was punished by
death. (Murano glass is still considered among the finest in Europe.)




           A glassblower in Murano, where, in the 16th century, glassmaking was raised to a high art.
   Meanwhile, in England, perhaps the single greatest innovation in glassmaking had been stumbled
upon. In 1674, a glassblower named George Ravenscroft discovered that adding a small amount of lead
oxide to molten glass made it more malleable. Elaborate designs could now be etched and cut into the
lead crystal. Moreover, after being formed, lead crystal was more brilliant and durable than simple glass.
   In propitious, yin-yang fashion, more beautiful glasses became an incentive to create better wines and
beverages. These, in turn, inspired ever more beautiful glasses. One of the best examples of this is
Champagne. First made in the late 1600s, Champagne was hazy with sediment, viscous, and sweet.
When advances in glassmaking led to glasses with a transparent brilliance and elegance never before
thought possible, the new, graceful glasses inspired improvements in Champagne making. In turn,
improvements in the clarity of Champagne inspired ever more stunning glasses into which beautiful
Champagne could be poured.
  From their invention until the beginning of the nineteenth century, glasses were used mainly by royalty,
and principally on special occasions. The purchase of a single wineglass was considered a serious
 investment, and at the most prestigious banquets, one glass might be shared by several dinner guests. If
 the host was especially wealthy, the banquet glasses might include some intentionally designed with a
 rounded bottom and no stem. Such glasses made the party livelier, since only cups that had been
 drained of their contents could be put down, lest the liquid spill out. These glass cups were the
 forerunners of our tumblers.
    In the nineteenth century, glass production soared as blowing techniques improved. Glass houses
 capable of large-scale manufacturing began to emerge. The process of making glasses in molds was
 invented. Glassmaking quickly achieved a scale of production that allowed sets to become affordable.
 Glasses became status symbols. At all of the best dinner parties, each guest’s place would be set with
 numerous goblets: one for Champagne, one for red wine, one for white, one for Sherry, and so on.
   Modern molds and techniques also allowed greater variation in bottle shapes and colors. Glass
 houses throughout Europe began producing signature bottles meant to be identified with certain wines.
 Bottles with sloping shoulders were used for Burgundy; extremely tapered bottles held German wines.
 High-shouldered bottles (helpful in blocking sediment while decanting) were used for Bordeaux.
    As the twentieth century drew to a close, a renewed sense of creativity gripped the world of
 glassmaking. Wineglass design ranged from dramatically whimsical to almost exaggeratedly classic. And
 for the first time in decades, wine bottles again became a vehicle for avant-garde design. Witness the
 utterly fragile, delicately curved modern shapes of grappa bottles. As much as the liquid inside, the
 beauty of these bottles has inspired a whole new generation at least to buy (if not to drink) Italian grappa.


SOAVE
One of Italy’s best-known, exported white wines, Soave comes from the castle-topped
hillside town of the same name, just east of Verona, in the western part of the Veneto.
Traditionally, Soaves—made from garganega and “trebbiano” (verdicchio bianco)—were
light, fresh, and at their best, smooth and soave (“suave” or “smooth” in Italian). Since the
early 1970s, however, a lot of the Soave produced has been commercial, bland, cheap jug
wine based on a neutral-tasting grape—an actual trebbiano variety—called trebbiano
Toscano and produced from vineyards that have enormous yields.




   Basic, featherweight Soave is never aged and can come from anywhere in the Soave
denomination, which was greatly expanded in the 1970s. A step up in quality is Soave
Classico, wine that comes from the original, smaller Soave zone on the steep hills above
the towns of Soave and Monteforte d’Alpone. An even greater step up in quality is Soave
Classico Superiore, which cannot be released until a year after the harvest.
   Finally, each year a tiny amount of sweet Soave is made from garganega grapes, using
the appassimento method. Like amarone and recioto della Valpolicella, recioto di Soave is
made from very ripe grapes that have been put in special drying rooms, allowing the
grapes to dry out and their sugars to concentrate. Since fermentation is halted before all of
the sugar is converted into alcohol, recioto di Soave is sweet. Although made in small
amounts, it is one of the true specialties of the Veneto and can be a stunningly delicious
wine. (Try the recioto di Soave from Pieropan.)
   The three absolute champions when it comes to Soave are the producers Anselmi
(which actually renounced the designation Soave years ago to protest the commercial
versions, and now labels its wines with proprietary names such as Capitel Croce), Gini,
and Pieropan (whose La Rocca is a terrific Soave). Other top producers to look for include
Bertani and Guerrieri Rizzardi.

PROSECCO
The Veneto’s ubiquitous spumante (“sparkling wine”), Prosecco is made principally from
glera grapes, sometimes with small amounts of pinot bianco, pinot grigio, or an
indigenous grape such as verdiso added. The grape glera used to be referred to as Prosecco
(so, historically, Prosecco the wine was made from prosecco grapes), but in 2009, when
Prosecco di Conegliano-Valdobbiadene was elevated to DOCG status, producers changed
the name to avoid confusion between the name of the grape and the name of the wine.
    Basic, inexpensive Prosecco is made from grapes grown at fairly high yields over a
very large area. A step up in quality are Proseccos made from the best glera grapes grown
in the original Prosecco Superiore zone, just north of Venice, in the rambling hills between
the villages of Conegliano and Valdobbiadene.
   Originally, Prosecco was only slightly fizzy. Today, most examples are fully sparkling
and dry (brut), with a simple fruity flavor and an appealing bitter edge. (Hence the
Bellini’s brilliance—sweet white peach juice as a counterpoint to glera’s bitterness.)
Prosecco, however, does not get its bubbles via the traditional (Champagne) method.
Rather, Prosecco is made by the Charmat process, in which the wine undergoes a second
fermentation in pressurized tanks rather than bottles. Most versions are not vintage dated.
That said, a new very high level of Prosecco has recently come to be. This level, called
rive (local dialect for “hillside”), is made up of small-production Proseccos that are
vintage dated and based on grapes grown in a single town.
   In the late afternoon, virtually every bar in Venice pours glass after glass of Prosecco,
which the civilized, chic Venetians consider revitalizing after working all day. (In the
2010s, with Prosecco sales soaring, it seemed like New Yorkers felt the same way.) Top
producers include Adriano Adami, Bisol Jeio, Bellenda, Carpenè Malvolti, Nino Franco,
Col Vetoraz, Sorelle Bronca, Mionetto, and Ruggeri.

                             AMARONE: SAY CHEESE
    Despite the common assumption that all red wines taste good with cheese, many cheeses can make red
    wines taste flat and hollow. One exception is amarone—which stands up to even dramatic cheeses. At 15
    to 16 percent alcohol and with a Portlike body and deep bitter chocolate, mocha, dried fig, and earthy
    flavors, amarone is a powerhouse. In his authoritative books on Italian wine, the Italian wine expert
    Victor Hazan (husband of the late, famed cookbook author Marcella Hazan) suggests that amarone is the
    perfect wine to drink with a roast, being careful to save the last glasses to sip during the finale: a plate of
    walnuts and bite-size chunks of Parmigiano-Reggiano.


AMARONE
Big, dense red wines the world over are unquestionably the product of very ripe grapes,
and very ripe grapes in turn are the product of warm, sunny places. Historically, this
simple fact meant that most relatively cool regions, and the Veneto is one, learned to be
satisfied making lighter reds or settling for whites. How, then, did the Veneto get to be
famous for amarone, an intense wine with a syrupy thickness? By the special style of
winemaking called appassimento. Here’s what happens.




   Amarone (the name means “great bitter one”) is made in the Valpolicella region, near
Verona, from the same grapes as Valpolicella: mainly corvina, with rondinella, molinara,
and sometimes negrara. But while the grapes for Valpolicella are picked during the regular
harvest, a small percentage of grapes (historically about 40 percent) are left to hang on the
vine a little longer, achieving extra ripeness before they are picked. These are the grapes
that can become amarone. Next, the best whole bunches of these ripe grapes are spread on
bamboo shelving or left hanging in the air in cool drying lofts for three to four months,
although the exact amount of time varies from producer to producer. This causes the
grapes to shrivel, further concentrating their sugar and flavors. As they dry and raisinate,
the grapes lose up to a third of their weight, mostly water. When the grapes are finally
crushed and fermented, the resulting wine is opulent, full-bodied, and, at 15 to 16 percent
alcohol, higher in alcohol than a regular Valpolicella, which averages around 12 percent.
Amarones are then aged for two years or more (four years for the riserva) before release.
Today, some of that aging may take place in small, new oak barrels, giving the wine even
broader and more powerful flavors.




    Corvina and rondinella grapes lose 30 percent of their weight as they dry on wooden or bamboo slats. Once
               concentrated in this way, the grapes will be used to make lush, full-bodied amarone.

   The labor-intensive method of concentrating grape sugar not only adds to the wine’s
cost, but the process itself is also fairly risky. Even a small amount of wet autumn weather
can cause the bunches to rot rather than dry out. As a result, producers who are less than
scrupulously careful and clean in their winemaking can end up with amarones with flavors
that seem to hint of mold and a certain dankness. But when the winemaking is above
reproach and the grapes selected for drying are only of the highest level and come from a
good vineyard, an amarone can be spellbinding—powerful almost to the point of Portlike
concentration, and packed with mocha and earthy flavors at the same time.
                       Venice is spread over 118 small islands connected by bridges and canals.




Lake Garda, the largest lake in Italy, was formed by glaciers at the end of the last Ice Age. The lake water is known for
its intense hues of blue. Around the lake, corvina, rondinella, molinara, and negrara vines thrive and are used to make
                                                 the light red Bardolino.

                      SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF AMARONE
   Allegrini • Bertani • Corte Sant’Alda • Le Ragose • Le Salette • Masi • Quintarelli • Romano dal Forno •
                  Serègo Alighieri • Speri • Tedeschi • Tommasi • Tommaso Bussola • Zenato


VALPOLICELLA AND BARDOLINO
Like amarone, Valpolicella is made from corvina, along with rondinella, molinara, and
sometimes negrara grapes. Five distinct styles of Valpolicella (the name means “valley of
many wine cellars”) are made. First is the basic, lightweight, grapey stuff, which is usually
not aged and can come from anywhere in the Valpolicella denomination. Like Soave, this
area was greatly expanded in the 1970s to meet increasing demand for inexpensive wine.
Better quality is Valpolicella Classico, which refers to wines that come from the original,
smaller Valpolicella zone. Better still is Valpolicella Classico Superiore, which must be
aged a year before release and, in practice, commands better grapes. In the hands of a
great producer like Allegrini, Valpolicella Classico Superiore can be a sensational wine,
with rich, minerally, dried cherry and licorice flavors.
   But there’s an even higher-quality, more intensely flavored, and thicker-textured kind
of Valpolicella yet. Called Valpolicella ripasso, it is made by taking the newly fermented
Valpolicella wine and adding it to amarone pomace, which is the pulpy mass of seeds and
skins leftover after the amarone has fermented. The Valpolicella is left in contact with the
powerfully flavorful amarone pomace for a couple of weeks, during which time the wine
picks up extra color, tannin, flavor, and structure from the pomace. In the end, the wine
can possess an almost zinfandel-like jamminess. The word ripasso comes from the verb
ripassare—“to pass over” or “do something again.” In particular, the producer Masi has
been at the forefront of making Valpolicella ripasso. Theirs, which was the first, is called
Campo Fiorin.
    Finally, there’s the fifth kind of Valpolicella, recioto della Valpolicella. Like amarone,
recioto della Valpolicella is made from the ripest grapes, which have been put in special
drying rooms, allowing the grapes to raisinate and their sugar to concentrate. But while, in
the case of amarone, all that sugar is converted into alcohol, thereby making the wine dry,
fermentation is halted for recioto della Valpolicella before all of the sugar is converted into
alcohol, so the wine is sweet. Only a tiny amount of recioto della Valpolicella is made, and
it can be utterly sensational—a rich, sweet, but not saccharine red wine that is supple and
complex and just waiting for an oozingly creamy Italian cheese, like a ripe Taleggio.

                                            THE BELLINI
    Italy’s legendary summertime cocktail, the Bellini, is a combination of icy-cold sparkling Prosecco and
    fresh white peach juice. The drink was invented in the 1930s at Harry’s Bar, in Venice, which employed
    one man each summer—when peaches were ripe—to do nothing but cut and pit small, fragile Italian
    white peaches (never the yellow variety) and then squeeze them by hand to extract the juice. Today, many
    Bellinis are made with frozen white peach juice exported from France and any sort of sparkling wine, but
    in the Veneto, every Bellini is the real thing.

  The top producers of Valpolicella, in addition to Allegrini and Masi, are Bertani,
Tedeschi, Quintarelli, and Tommasi.
    Though often thought of as a stand-in for Valpolicella, Bardolino is quite different,
although it’s made from the same grapes. Named after the town of Bardolino, on Lake
Garda, the wine—more pink than red—is very light-bodied, with faint cherry flavors and
sometimes an edge of spiciness. (It is drunk by the carafe with pizza in the modest
trattorias along the lake.) Bardolino Classico, from the original district surrounding the
town, is a more interesting wine than simple Bardolino. When turned into an inexpensive
rosé sparkling wine, Bardolino is called chiaretto, which is a popular summertime quaff.
In the fall, basic Bardolino is also made as a novello wine, a takeoff on commercial-tasting
Beaujolais Nouveau. All types of Bardolino are best drunk slightly chilled. The top
producer of Bardolino is Guerrieri-Rizzardi.

                        WHEN YOU VISIT… THE VENETO
         Start out in the magical city of Venice, and make day trips to the Veneto’s vine-covered
         hills, which stretch from the Austrian border through Prosecco country to the eastern
         shores of Lake Garda. The landscape is beautiful; the food stellar. Lovers of sparkling
         wine should not miss the Strada del Vino Prosecco (Prosecco wine route) that winds
         through the Treviso hills. For most wineries, appointments are necessary, and it helps
         to have a working knowledge of Italian.
                            The Veneto Wines to Know
                                                 SPARKLING




                                             ADRIANO ADAMI
                                          PROSECCO | GARBÈL | BRUT
                                                     100% glera
This is one of the freshest, loveliest Proseccos around, despite being the Adami family’s “basic” Prosecco. (Its big
sister, called Vigneto Giardino, is masterful.) The Garbèl’s beautiful tinge of briochelike yeastiness gives it a flavor
that’s deeper and a little more sophisticated than that of most other Proseccos. And while many moderately priced
Proseccos are rather thin and slightly bitter (making them cry out for a Bellini-Band-Aid of peach juice), the
Adriano Adami Garbèl is gingery and creamy on the palate. The word garbèl, in the old Venetian dialect, means
“crisp and dry.”

                                                       REDS




                                                  ALLEGRINI
                                                      LA GROLA
                                      80% corvina, 10% syrah, 10% oseleta
This is my favorite “Valpolicella,” although, since it is made outside the specific requirements for the Valpolicella
DOC, it’s designated an IGT. La Grola comes from the high-elevation, chalky-clay vineyard La Grola, and a richer,
more lively, flavor-packed Veronese red does not exist (apart, of course, from amarone). The wine’s silky texture
and heady aromatics are immediately seductive, but the whirlwind of racy flavors—spices, tobacco, tar, raspberries,
graphite, minerals, and licorice—is unbeatable. Best of all, La Grola always possesses a distinctive character that’s
not unlike the sweet-bitter quality of Italian bitters, making it a very sophisticated wine at the table.
                                                   ALLEGRINI

                                AMARONE DELLA VALPOLICELLA CLASSICO
                                    80% corvina, 15% rondinella, 5% oseleta
If you could only ever drink one superb amarone, this should be the one. Indeed, Allegrini’s amarone reaches
heights of complexity that few others do. It’s hard to say exactly what the wine is like. The intense aromas and
flavors are equal parts fruity, salty, savory, acidic, and bitter. Tasting this not long ago, my mind flashed through:
cherry-filled chocolate truffles; the saline taste of blood; the umami of a chunk of Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese; the
high soprano notes of a great balsamic vinegar; the complex bitters of, say, Fernet-Branca. Not surprisingly, the
way the wine feels is also irresistible. Ribbons of cashmere richness seem to weave through the center of the wine.
And the finish appears never ready to surrender. In the end, I am stunned—but not stunned, for just about
everything the Allegrini family touches turns to vinous magic. Their sweet recioto is a masterpiece (fewer and
fewer producers today attempt to make this complex red dessert wine) and their single-vineyard wines, like La
Grola, show just how rich and delicious great Veneto wine can be.




                                                     ZENATO

                                      AMARONE DELLA VALPOLICELLA
                                  70% corvina, 20% rondinella, 10% molinara
No wine is more perfect during the long, raw, cold winters in northern Italy (or anywhere, for that matter) than
amarone. Big, lustful, and earthy, amarone is warming and satisfying. Zenato’s amarone fits this bill exactly, but in
great years it’s also among the softest and most hedonistic of amarones, with deep, luscious, earthy, chocolate,
balsamic, and fruit flavors. The complexity of Zenato’s amarones always reminds me of Venetian cooking, where
sweet, sour, and savory flavors are used with exquisite balance.
                                                       MASI

                AMARONE DELLA VALPOLICELLA | CLASSICO RISERVA | COSTASERA
            Approximately 70% corvina, with rondinella, molinara, and a tiny amount of oseleta
If you don’t know amarone, Masi is a good place to begin for its lush, ripe, almost Portlike texture. Costasera is one
of the winery’s top amarones and comes from vineyards that the winery says “face the sunset.” The riserva version
contains the rare native Venetian grape oseleta, once thought to be extinct, but rescued, due in large part to the
efforts of Masi. This is a muscular amarone, and one that is utterly fascinating, with flavors and aromas suggestive
of leather, grenadine, plums, violets, exotic spices, and black licorice. In the small restaurants of northern Italy,
amarones like Masi’s are drunk with hearty slabs of roasted meat.

                                              SWEET WINE
                                                    MACULAN
                                                     TORCOLATO
                                                    100% vespaiola
Italian desserts and sweet wines are generally not as sweet as their French counterparts. Torcolato is a great
example of this. Devastatingly intense in flavor, it’s only faintly sweet, and it’s certainly not syrupy. Instead, this
forceful neon-yellow/orange wine is bursting with flavors (exotic oranges, bitter walnut skin, dried citrus peel,
apricot, bergamot-infused tea, cardamom, honey) that, mingled together, taste strangely beautiful and refined. In
Italy, Torcolato is called a wine for meditation. Its hypnotic persuasion is certainly undeniable.
Friuli-Venezia Giulia, on the cusp of the Alps, is renowned for fresh, lively wines that possess almost Teutonic precision.
FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA

Sticking out like a small ear from the northeastern corner of Italy, Friuli-Venezia Giulia
(usually just called Friuli) is culturally and historically rich. For centuries, northern
European and Near Eastern tribes moved through the region on their way to the
Mediterranean. The overland spice routes ran through Friuli from the markets of the
Byzantine Empire to Venice. Much later—before it became part of the newly formed
country of Italy in 1866—Friuli was the strategic Mediterranean port province of the
Austro-Hungarian Empire. Even today, the region seems psychologically much closer to
Austria than, say, to Rome. And you can almost taste the proximity in the wines. More
than any other wines in Italy, they have Teutonic precision, focus, and grip.
   After so many centuries of exposure to eclectic ethnic influences, cultural diversity,
political jockeying, and mercantile bustle, the Friulians have been left with a sense of
dynamism, a can-do spirit, and a healthy attitude when it comes to change. You can taste
this, too, in the wines. As a group, Friulian wines are spirited, creative, highly varied, and
wholly individualistic.

               THE QUICK SIP ON FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA
         MANY OF ITALY’S MOST VIBRANT, racy white wines are produced here.
         FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA’S TOP whites are sometimes 100% varietal wines, made
         entirely from such varieties as Friulano and ribolla gialla, and sometimes they are
         blends made from those varieties plus international varieties like pinot grigio (pinot gris),
         sauvignon blanc, and chardonnay.
         DESPITE THE RENOWN ACCORDED the region’s whites, red wines account for
         almost half of the total production in Friuli. The most prestigious red grapes are merlot,
         cabernet sauvignon, and cabernet franc, as well as the native grape schioppettino, all
         of which are turned into stunning wines.

   In a country where “real” wine generally means red wine, Friuli is acclaimed as one of
the top places in the world for racy whites. In particular, Friuli’s pinot grigios, sauvignon
blancs, and ribolla giallas can be stunning, as can its chardonnays. But if any white wine
has captured the Friulian heart, it is one that is theirs alone: Friulano. (Before legislation in
2007 shortened its name, Friulano was called tocai Friulano, a term that confusingly
implied a connection—where none exists—with Hungarian Tokaji.) Each of the grape
varieties above is made into single-varietal wines and is used in the region’s numerous
white blends, such as Vintage Tunina, a blend of sauvignon blanc, chardonnay, ribolla
gialla, malvasia, and picolit (the percentage of each grape variety in the composition is a
secret) by the producer Jermann.
       Trieste, a vibrant port city on Friuli’s Adriatic Coast, is a city that understands how to eat and drink.

   Notwithstanding the popularity and success of Friuli’s white wines, the region makes
some stunning reds. Indeed, more than 40 percent of the region’s wines are red. Most of
this is merlot, which, grown in Friuli’s warmer pockets, can be fantastic. But three other
local grape varieties can also be stellar: schioppettino, tazzelenghe, and pignolo. (In the
local dialect, scoppiettio means “to pop” or “crackle;” tazzelenghe translates as “cuts the
tongue”; and pignolo means “fussy.”)

                       THE NAME FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA
    Friuli and Venezia Giulia were once two separate provinces. The “Giulia” of Venezia Giulia refers to
    Julius Caesar. So does Friuli, which is derived from the Latin Forum Julii, now the city of Cividale, in
    the renowned eastern wine district of Colli Orientali.

  Then there are sweet wines. As any knowledgeable Italian wine lover probably knows,
two of Italy’s most exquisite dessert wines, verduzzo di Ramandolo and picolit, are both
made in Friuli (although admittedly in tiny quantities).
   Finally, Friuli is one of the most ambitious and successful winemaking regions of Italy.
Premium wines (those with DOC or DOCG status) constitute more than 50 percent of its
total production. Moreover, in less than three decades Friuli’s white wines have gained an
international following. No other region of Italy has moved so quickly from near obscurity
to distinction.
                                     THE TRE VENEZIE
Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino-Alto Adige, and the Veneto, the three northeastern regions of Italy, are
known collectively as the Tre Venezie—“Three Venices”—because of their historical relationship to the
Republic of Venice. Today, they are united by more than history alone. With only a handful of exceptions,
Italy’s most stylish, highest-quality white wines come from this area. Bordered on the north by the
majestic Alps, the regions share a northern climate and a way of doing things that doesn’t quite seem
Mediterranean in spirit. Germanic, Austrian, Swiss, Croatian, and Slovenian influences go back
centuries. The cultural ties crop up in local dialects, local dishes, and even in the precise and decisive
way winemakers go about making their wines. Not surprisingly, two of the best wine schools in Italy are
located in the Tre Venezie, and one of Europe’s largest vine nurseries is in Friuli-Venezia Giulia. More
than half the vines planted in Italy originated there.


        SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF FRIULIAN PINOT GRIGIO
 Jermann • Marco Felluga • Pierpaolo Pecorari • Renato Keber • Ronco dei Tassi • Ronco del Gnemiz •
                                Schiopetto • Števerjan • Villa Russiz
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Friuli-Venezia Giulia is a small place—some 3,000 square miles (7,780 square kilometers)
—considerably smaller than the metropolitan area of Los Angeles (about 4,800 square
miles/12,430 square kilometers), for example. Despite its small size, the region is known
for more than a dozen grape varieties. (While a lot, this is far fewer than in the past.
Before phylloxera arrived in Friuli at the end of the nineteenth century, more than 350
varieties were grown here!)
   The Alps form Friuli’s northern border, and the northern half of the region is extremely
mountainous. As a result, nearly all of the vineyards—about 49,000 acres (19,800
hectares)—are located in the southern half. The best are situated on sloping Alpine
foothills, but the vast majority of Friulian vineyards are on the plains that stretch inland
from the Adriatic Sea. It is this juxtaposition of mountains and sea that creates the cool
nights and warm days that contribute to the exhilaratingly taut structure and pinpoint
balance of Friuli’s best wines. It is important that the vineyards lie across hillsides and
plains on the sunny south side of the Alps. Here, exposed to the heat and light of the sun,
the grapes have time to ripen fully. As a result, Friuli can grow both white and red
varieties well, and the whites are not fragile; they are whites with body and a determined
grip.
                  THE GRAPES OF FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA
                                                WHITES
CHARDONNAY: An important grape. Can make monodimensional wines or lush, highly complex ones,
depending on the producer and the site.
FRIULANO: A very important local favorite. The same as the grape sauvignon vert (which is distinctly
different from sauvignon blanc). The wines made from it can be stunningly complex and creamy.
PICOLIT: A native grape used to make interesting, rare dessert wines. Only a tiny amount is produced
due to the vines’ genetic predisposition to abort their berries for no good reason.
PINOT BIANCO: Also known as pinot blanc. Wines from it are usually good, not great. Often blended
with chardonnay.
PINOT GRIGIO: Also known as pinot gris. A popular variety. Makes light- to medium-bodied wines that
range from decent to delicious.
RIBOLLA GIALLA: An important variety. In Friuli, makes very attractive, aromatic wines with delicious,
exotic, citrusy, peachy flavors.
SAUVIGNON BLANC: A popular variety. Turned into zesty, wild, dramatic wines, the best of which could
be confused with the zesty, wild sauvignon blancs of South Africa.
VERDUZZO FRIULANO: A special native grape that is used to make Friuli’s most stunning dessert wine,
verduzzo di Ramandolo.
VITOVSKA: Grown near the border with Slovenia, in the Isonzo and Carso region of Friuli-Venezia
Giulia. Makes fascinating, fleshy, dry white wines with elegant, rich, floral, herbal, and fruit flavors.

                                                  REDS
CABERNET FRANC: The second most popular red variety. First planted in Friuli in the late nineteenth
century. Often high in acidity and lean in body, but can make good cranberry-flavored wines.
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: While less widespread than cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon was planted
in Friuli even earlier. The wines are usually lean and tight.
MERLOT: The most widely planted red. Makes wines that range in quality from lean and austere to rich
and silky.
PIGNOLO: A rare, indigenous variety making distinctive wines especially near the towns of Buttrio and
Rosazzo.
REFOSCO: The collective name for a handful of different varieties, the main one of which is refosco dal
peduncolo rosso, which makes a popular, zesty, inky, easy-drinking red in Friuli.
SCHIOPPETTINO: The most sophisticated local red variety. Wines made from it are sharp and
concentrated, with multiple fruit and spice flavors.
TAZZELENGHE: Translates literally as “cuts the tongue.” Makes unusually bold, high-acid wines. Native
to the larger region encompassing Friuli-Venezia Giulia and western Slovenia.
                    THE MOST IMPORTANT FRIULIAN WINES
                                           LEADING WINES
          CABERNET FRANC red
          CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
          CHARDONNAY white
          FRIULANO white
          MERLOT red
          PINOT BIANCO white
          PINOT GRIGIO white
          REFOSCO red
          RIBOLLA GIALLA white
          SAUVIGNON BLANC white
          SCHIOPPETTINO red

                                            WINES OF NOTE
          PICOLIT white (sweet)
          PIGNOLO red
          TAZZELENGHE red
          VERDUZZO DI RAMANDOLO white (sweet)




    Cividale, a Friulian town in the foothills of the Alps, was founded by Julius Caesar as a municipality of Rome.

   The two most prestigious wine districts in Friuli are Colli Orientali del Friuli and Collio
(technically known as Collio Goriziano). Both are in the far east, just short of the
Slovenian border. Here, the best hilly vineyards are located on terraces, where the well-
drained, crumbly, calcium-rich marl and sandstone soil is known as flysch. The soil in the
valleys tends more toward clay, sand, and gravel.
  In the local Friulian dialect, the tops of the terraced hillsides are called ronchi. The
word ronchi—or the singular, ronco—is often the first word of the name of a vineyard or
wine estate, such as Ronco dei Tassi (hilltop of the badgers). As for the word colli, it
means “small hills” in Friulian dialect. Colli Orientali refers to eastern hills.
   Sophisticated white wine was Friuli’s toe up in the world, but characteristically, the
Friulians took their own approach to making it. During the 1970s and 1980s, while almost
every up-and-coming wine region in the world was focused on creating unctuous, barrel-
fermented, oak-aged wines, especially chardonnays, Friulian producers (especially
Schiopetto and Livio Felluga) were committed to making the opposite—taut, kinetic
whites with a spring-loaded urgency of acidity, and flavors devoted to the purity of the
grapes. Among the other places that share this philosophy of purity are Alsace and the
Loire Valley in France, and the wine regions of Germany and Austria, New Zealand, and
Friuli’s eastern neighbor, Slovenia.
                              WHERE DREAMS CAN HAPPEN
  Among the most legendary Friulian wines are those of the artistic winemaker Silvio Jermann. In 1977, at
  the age of twenty-one, Jermann created Italy’s first cult white wine—Vintage Tunina, a then secret blend
  made up of sauvignon blanc, chardonnay, ribolla gialla, malvasia, and picolit, among other grapes.
  Vintage Tunina was so voluptuous and nuanced (many Italian wine pros consider it the perfect white with
  truffles), it set off the modern trend for sophisticated Friulian white blends. (Tunina was the name of the
  old woman who originally owned the vineyard from which the grapes came… as well as the name of one
  of Casanova’s lovers.) Jermann’s genius is the ability to pull deep facets of personality from each grape.
  Every Jermann wine, from sauvignon blanc and ribolla gialla to Friulano and chardonnay, is clearly
  focused, powerfully flavored, and impeccably balanced. Until 1987, no Jermann wine was made or aged
  in new oak. In that year, Jermann created a barrel-fermented chardonnay originally called “Where the
  Dreams Have No End.” The name, a takeoff on the song “Where the Streets Have No Name” by the Irish
  rock group U2, was later changed to just “W… Dreams.” To Jermann (who says that his dreams help
  inform his winemaking), the “W dot dot dot” means “where dreams can happen.”




 Silvio Jermann, one of the innovative Friulian winemakers who revolutionized white winemaking in Italy in the 1980s.

   Above all, Friulian whites have presence. Rarely plain-Jane or frail, these are
concentrated, complex whites with enticing aromas and pronounced fruity-spicy-earthy
flavors. And while many pinot grigios are about as exciting as tap water, the top Friulian
pinot grigios can soar with delicate peach, almond, and green apple flavors (Števerjan’s,
for example) or be so voluptuous and rich they seem to be descended from ice cream
(Jermann’s).
   Friulano, the local favorite, is probably the hardest Friulian wine to describe. It ranges
from smoky, resinous, and white peppery to lush and vanilla-y to spiked with minerals,
exotic spices, and something like honey cake (or in some cases, it combines all of these
sensations, as does the extraordinary Friulano called “Plus,” from the producer
Bastianich). Because of its intensity, many Friulian winemakers refer to it as the most
masculine of the white grapes.
   Wines made from ribolla gialla can be so pretty, so exuberantly fresh, so delightfully
peachy, floral, and citrusy, and so simply satisfying that it’s amazing this grape is not
grown anywhere else in any significant amounts except in Slovenia, next door. Villa
Russiz and Josko Gravner make especially appealing ones.




The hilly Collio region of Friuli-Venezia Guilia. The Collio and the Colli Orientali del Friuli are the province’s two most
                       important wine districts. Both lie near Italy’s eastern border with Slovenia.

   The sauvignon blancs (the name is usually shortened to just sauvignon) are usually
terrific wines—lean, zesty, peppery, and smoky, with a green, resiny end reminiscent of
capers. As for Friulian chardonnays, their quality and style vary greatly, but from a master
like Jermann, chardonnay—even in a voluptuous style—is utter elegance.




   It would seem counterintuitive that a relatively cool region known for vivacious white
wines would also produce a significant number of delicious reds. Yet, as noted, a
significant amount of Friulian wine is red, and much of that is structured, concentrated
merlot. Other dynamic reds here are made from grape varieties thought to have originated
in Friuli, or in Slovenia, next door. Schioppettino, one of the best, nearly disappeared from
Friuli in the wake of phylloxera, but was rescued in the 1970s when Paolo Rapuzzi, owner
of Ronchi di Cialla winery, collected one hundred extant vines and clandestinely had them
grafted to make them available for propagation (schioppettino was not an officially
allowed variety in Friuli at the time). Wines made from schioppettino can be startling—
hauntingly dry with sharp peppery, spicy, black cherry flavors and a tight, angular body.
The word schioppettino comes from scoppiettio, to “crackle” or “pop,” a possible
reference to the grape’s or wine’s texture. Like schioppettino, pignolo, too, was almost
extinct until a few vines discovered in the 1970s were painstakingly nurtured and the
variety was recultivated. The name pignolo means “fussy”—a reference to its low yields
and the difficulty of growing it. Refosco is actually the collective name for a handful of
different local varieties, the most widespread of which is refosco dal peduncolo rosso
(literally, “refosco with the red stem”). In Friuli it makes a great everyday drinking wine,
with dense blueberry and blackberry flavors and vivid acidity. As for tazzelenghe (“cuts
the tongue”), it is dagger sharp. The grape is native to the area encompassing Friuli as well
as western Slovenia, and is also known as refosco del botton (not the same variety as
refosco dal peduncolo rosso).
   Merlot and cabernet have been made in Friuli for more than a century. In the past, these
were sometimes austere, light, and lean wines. Not so today. As winemakers have better
understood the nuances of making red wines in fairly cool climates, Friuli’s merlots and
cabernets have become far more flavorful and concentrated. There are a score of great
merlots made here, including those from Moschioni, Miani, Meroi, Schiopetto, Damijan,
Vie de Romans, and La Castellada. And, as is true of the white wines, the reds of Friuli are
often unpredictably intriguing blends. Le Vigne di Zamo’s Ronco dei Roseti, for example,
takes on a sharply spicy, forest-floor character, thanks to the tazzelenghe and refosco that
are added to the blend of cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and cabernet franc.
                   SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF FRIULANO
    Abbazia di Rosazzo • Bastianich • EnoFriulia • Francesco Pecorari • Jermann • Livio Felluga • Marco
     Felluga • Miani • Pierpaolo Pecorari • Ronco dei Tassi • Števerjan • Villa Russiz • Le Vigne di Zamò
                      THE FAMOUS PROSCIUTTO OF FRIULI
 Prosciutto is so much a part of the culinary landscape, it’s hard to believe that certain countries, including
 the United States, once banned the importation of the famous ham. In the U.S., that changed on
 September 6, 1989, when six thousand haunches of prosciutto were cradled aboard jets and flown to
 New York.
   Prosciutto is made all over Italy, but the best comes from just one type of pig: the massive (350-
 pound/160-kilogram) Lambrea pig, raised either in Friuli, near the town of San Daniele (for prosciutto di
 San Daniele), or in Emilia-Romagna, near the town of Parma (for prosciutto di Parma). The pigs are fed
 natural grains and the rich whey from such famous cheeses as Parmigiano-Reggiano.




    Only 999 left to massage. A worker rubs, pats, and pounds haunches of prosciutto di San Daniele, made from
          Lambrea pigs raised in Friuli. The meat is rubbed with salt and naturally cured over 400 days.
     The raw ham is cured without smoke or heat over the course of four hundred days. (By contrast, some
 American hams are processed in one day.) First, the meat is thickly salted, then the hams are massaged,
 pounded, rubbed, and eventually washed with water and a stiff wire brush. The haunches are hung to air
 cure slowly in specially designed buildings with long vertical windows. In Friuli, it is said that the warm,
 salty sea air mixed with the cold Alpine air is a perfect combination—the result is a coral-pink ham with a
 silky texture and a sweet, meaty taste that is exceedingly complex. In Friuli, prosciutto combined with
 melon or figs is served with a fruity, floral white wine, often a glass of Friulano or ribolla gialla.


FRIULI’S SWEET WINES
Italy makes more diverse, fascinating dessert wines than any other country in the world,
and two of the most intriguing are Friulian—verduzzo di Ramandolo, made from verduzzo
Friulano grapes, and picolit, made from picolit grapes. Both grape varieties are grown on
the Alpine hillsides of the Colli Orientali.
   Verduzzo di Ramandolo is made near the tiny village of Ramandolo. This is one of the
lightest-bodied, most exquisite dessert wines made anywhere. Often it has a beautiful
coppery sheen and touches of herbal flavors. The best producers are Giovanni Dri, Ronchi
di Manzano, Livon, and Ronchi di Cialla.
   Picolit (from piccolo, “small” in Italian, a reference to the tiny size of the clusters)
probably shouldn’t even exist. The grape variety has a genetic mutation that causes it to
spontaneously abort the flowers on its newly formed clusters (the flowers that ultimately
would become grapes). Even in good years, less than half of picolit’s flowers survive to
become pollinated and evolve into grapes. The wine, as a result, is very expensive. The
best picolits are gossamer, with a delicate honeyed flavor (try the picolits from Livio
Felluga, Ronchi di Cialla, and Dorigo). Indeed, picolit was one of Friuli’s first
internationally successful wines and—bottled in handmade Murano glass—was sought
after by European nobility in the eighteenth century.

              WHEN YOU VISIT… FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA
         Most wineries in the Collio and Colli Orientali districts are an easy drive from the
         ancient port city of Trieste. (Coffee lovers take note: This is where the espresso maker
         Illy has its headquarters; thus, the coffee around town is magnificent.) Farther inland,
         the wine town of Udine, with its Venetian Renaissance-style piazza, serves as an
         unofficial headquarters for traveling wine lovers who want to make day trips in all
         directions. Appointments are necessary.
                           The Friulian Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                                SCHIOPETTO
                                                  PINOT GRIGIO
                                                 100% pinot grigio
This is not your standard pinot grigio. In fact, Schiopetto’s pinot grigio towers above most other Italian versions.
For one thing, the wine is complex (not usually true) and for another, it has a sophisticated weight and presence on
the palate (very rare for pinot grigio). But above all, this wine has fascinating choreography; it moves with energy.
From a core of dense fruit, sparks of flavor fly out in all directions. It’s like tasting a sunburst.
                                                   BASTIANICH

                                             PLUS | VENEZIA GIULIA
                                                   100% Friulano
It’s safe to say the Bastianich family understands flavor. The mother, Lidia, is one of the foremost experts on Italian
food in the United States and is an author and television host. The son, Joe, is a wine expert and a business partner
with his mother and with United States super chef Mario Batali. Together they are the primary owners of a slew of
famous restaurants, including New York’s Del Posto. The family’s ties to Friuli-Venezia Giulia go back generations,
so it’s no surprise that their wine ventures are based there. And what wine they make! In a lineup of Bastianich
wines, the taster simply runs out of superlatives, if not adjectives. But the wine that I find most stunning is their
Friulano called Plus. The grapes come from a single vineyard of sixty-year-old vines. Ten percent of the wine is
made appassimento, that is, by drying the grapes over a period of months to raisinate and shrivel them, thereby
concentrating their sugars. (This is the process used to make amarone in the Veneto.) The intense richness of the
wine is matched only by its impeccable elegance. The core of fruit has near atomic density. And the flavors are
sweet, savory, and minerally all at once. As oxymoronic as it may sound, Plus explodes slowly on the palate.




                                                     JERMANN

                                                VINTAGE TUNINA
 Chardonnay and sauvignon blanc with small amounts of ribolla gialla, malvasia, and sometimes picolit;
                                    percentages not disclosed
One of the greatest Italian white wines from one of the greatest Friulian winemakers, Vintage Tunina proved early
on that the sky was the limit for Friulian whites. The wine—a blend of multiple grapes—is a huge, voluptuous riot
of juicy flavors, the equivalent of an Impressionist painting.
                                                   VILLA RUSSIZ

                                                  RIBOLLA GIALLA
                                                 100% ribolla gialla
Not as patently aromatic as, say, muscat or riesling, ribolla gialla has a smell that’s delicately intoxicating. Did
someone just walk into the room holding a vase of jasmine? A pear tart just whisked from the oven? But aroma is
only one of this grape’s strong suits. When made impeccably, as is this Villa Russiz, the wine sweeps across the
palate with waves of fruit, minerals, exotic spices, and delicious zestlike bitters. Ribolla gialla, one of Italy’s most
underrated, fantastic whites, is thought to have come to Friuli from Slovenia, next door. Also highly notable is Villa
Russiz’s fantastic sauvignon—Sauvignon de la Tour—which also possesses flavors that sweep over the palate in
rushes of intensity.

                                                       REDS
                                                BASTIANICH
                                              CALABRONE ROSSO
                          70% refosco, 10% schioppettino, 10% pignolo, 10% merlot
Made like amarone (harvested grapes are hung or laid on mats in special rooms to dry and concentrate their sugars),
Calabrone Rosso is a knockout of a wine. Its get-outta-my-way force and driving power would make it ideal for,
say, Wall Street. Every aspect of the wine—from the aroma to the texture to the finish—is massive and masculine,
and built to age well. Naturally somewhat tannic, the refosco here takes on an almost syrahlike, delicious
corruptness, tasting of earth, peat, cigars, espresso, and Scotch.




                                                 VIE DI ROMANS

                                                VOOS DAI CIAMPS
                                                    100% merlot
The proprietor of Vie di Romans, Gianfranco Gallo, makes some of the lushest, ripest reds in Friuli—wines of great
power and exactitude that burst from the glass in a flurry of dense chocolate flavors, minerals, wild berries, and a
lacy note of vanilla given their considerable time in oak. This is no casual sipper of a merlot, but rather an intense,
structured wine that commands a few years of aging and then a great meal.
                                                  MOSCHIONI

                                               SCHIOPPETTINO
                                              100% schioppettino
This is the real deal… a stunning, opulent schioppettino that shows how sensational the indigenous reds of northern
Italy can be. Generally, the Moschioni family allows the grapes to dry for several weeks (amarone style) before
fermenting them. The result is a spicy, earthy, minerally red with a core of dense cherry preserve flavors, and a
vibrancy on the palate that is worthy of an electric current. One of Friuli’s most lip-smacking reds, like all good
schioppettinos, it begs for food.
TUSCANY

Toscana to the Italians, Tuscany is the quintessential Italian wine region. Here, where the
Renaissance was born and where the church has reigned with near omnipotent power,
wine has strong ties to both art and religion. Yet at the same time, wine has always been
the most humble of Tuscan comforts—on the table at every meal (breakfast excepted);
sometimes, with a piece of bread, a meal in itself.
   Tuscany is also the birthplace of four of Italy’s most important red wines: Chianti,
Chianti Classico, brunello di Montalcino, and vino nobile di Montepulciano. Though all
are made from the variety sangiovese, the wines taste quite different. One reason is that
Tuscany is a plethora of distinct mesoclimates. These are created by an endless succession
of twisting, turning, undulating hills and low mountains. Another reason is that
sangiovese, a finicky and demanding grape, has begotten hundreds of clones or genetic
variations of itself. Over time, these variations have adapted to their local environments
and taken on distinct flavor characteristics. In addition, it’s fascinating to know that while
sangiovese is today inextricably linked to Tuscany, the variety appears to have originated
in southern Italy. Surprising DNA research in 2004 revealed one of sangiovese’s parents to
be Calabrese di Montenuovo (from Calabria), and the other parent to be ciliegiolo (Italian
for “small cherry”), now cultivated all over Italy.

      “Sangiovese, to be a great wine, needs a good connection with God.”
                                                        — LAMBERTO FRESCOBALDI,
                                                               Marc hesi de’Frescobaldi


                            THE QUICK SIP ON TUSCANY
         TUSCANY IS THE HOME of four of Italy’s most important, well-known red wines:
         Chianti, Chianti Classico, brunello di Montalcino, and vino nobile di Montepulciano.
         THE LEADING RED GRAPE, used in every major traditional wine, is sangiovese,
         considered one of the greatest red grapes of Italy.
         A WINE REVOLUTION in the 1970s and 1980s led to wines of an immensely higher
         quality, as well as the creation of the so-called Super Tuscans, a group of avant-garde,
         expensive wines made in an untraditional manner.

   For English-speaking wine drinkers and food lovers in the 1960s, Tuscany seemed to
symbolize a kind of cultural chic. Chianti wines, in particular, were romantic, earthy,
“European,” and fit the bohemian esthetic (and budget). But the old Chianti of red
checkered tablecloths and amorous evenings was, for the most part, not very good wine.
By the 1970s the market for Chianti—and the wine’s international reputation—had
reached an all-time low. As the full impact of this realization began to sink in, Tuscans
were shocked into action. With the help of new wine laws (see the Appendix on Wine
Laws, page 924), the Tuscan wine industry bounced back with what is considered one of
the most dramatic revolutions in the world of modern wine. The result was vastly superior,
exciting wines, including a slew of internationally acclaimed, expensive Super Tuscans.
                Many Tuscan vineyards are lined with the region’s stunning, tall cypress trees.

   All of this said, from a 35,000-foot (10,700-meter) view, there’s a flavor and feel to
Tuscan wine—red wine in particular—that, to me, is dramatically different from wines
made almost anywhere else. There’s a firmness and espressolike bitterness to the wines—
the result of acidity coupled with tannin. Sangiovese is, like pinot noir, a grape relatively
high in acidity. At the same time, modern winemaking methods have coaxed more color,
power, and tannin from the grape. Significant acidity and tannin, when found together in
the same wine, is not always easy to take. The best wines pull off the marriage. For lower
quality wines, the combination can be a train wreck. (Top Tuscan wines never taste better
than they do in Tuscany itself because one’s palate is usually coated in olive oil—a
countermeasure against the firm, bitter bite of the wine.)
   So much red wine has always been made in Tuscany that, with the exception of the
famous dessert wine vin santo, white wine has been mostly an afterthought. Yet some
high-quality, dry white Tuscan wine is made—mostly modern-style sauvignon blancs and
chardonnays. As for Tuscany’s standby traditional dry white, vernaccia di San Gimignano,
there now exist many more high-quality examples than in the past.
The interior courtyard of the Palazzo Chigi-Saracini in central Siena. Built in the Gothic style in the 12th century as a
        private urban palace, its curved exterior façade traces the ancient, narrow, curving streets of the city.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

As visitors to Tuscany quickly discover, there doesn’t seem to be a straight line in the
entire region. Winding back and forth and up and down along Tuscany’s rural roads, it’s
impossible not to fall in love with the patchwork of vineyards that cover a landscape
undulating so magically. To any driver, it comes as no surprise that the region is roughly
68 percent hills. The paucity of flat land means that nearly every vineyard is on a slope of
some kind, gentle or steep, and that even two vineyards that are only a stone’s throw apart
often produce wines of very different character.
    Tuscany stretches from the Tyrrhenian Sea in the west to the low mountains that
separate the region from Emilia-Romagna, the Marche, and Umbria, its neighbors to the
east. At nearly 9,000 square miles (23,300 square kilometers), it is the fifth largest region
in Italy. Yet most of the important wine zones are more or less in the middle of the region,
from Florence in the north to Siena in the center and then south to the tiny hill town of
Montalcino (famous for brunello). The climate in this central zone is warm, although not
as warm or humid as along the Tyrrhenian coast. Nights are cool, helping to preserve the
natural acidity of the grapes, particularly in sangiovese. Soil varies considerably, but the
well-drained slopes of the central hills tend to be sandy or stony, calcareous, and
interspersed with schist and galestro (a crumbly, stony marl).

                 THE MOST IMPORTANT TUSCAN WINES
                                   LEADING WINES
         BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO red
         CARMIGNANO red
         CHIANTI red
         CHIANTI CLASSICO red
         MORELLINO DI SCANSANO red
         SUPER TUSCANS red
         VINO NOBILE DI MONTEPULCIANO red

                                   WINES OF NOTE
         CHARDONNAY white
         ROSSO DI MONTALCINO red
         ROSSO DI MONTEPULCIANO red
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white
         VERNACCIA DI SAN GIMIGNANO white
         VIN SANTO white (sweet)

   Like many Italian wine regions, Tuscany was once home to dozens of grape varieties
(in the mid-eighteenth century, more than two hundred were officially recognized). But in
modern times, the region has been identified almost exclusively with two grapes:
sangiovese, for centuries Tuscany’s single greatest grape, and cabernet sauvignon,
responsible for making up, in whole or as part of the blend, numerous famous Super
Tuscan wines.
                               THE GRAPES OF TUSCANY
                                                WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: A minor grape accounting for a small production of expensive white wines.
 MALVASIA BIANCA LUNGA: One of the many different varieties in the world that have malvasia as part
 of the name. In the past, it was the white grape blended into Chianti in small amounts to lighten it. Now it
 is the grape best known for vin santo, the famous Tuscan dessert wine.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: Limited amounts are grown, but wines made from this grape show promise.
 TREBBIANO: Technically, trebbiano Toscano. Formerly used with malvasia in Chianti, and now used for
 vin santo as well as for dry white wines generally of neutral character.
 VERNACCIA: Makes Tuscany’s most traditional, simple white wine; grown around the hill town of San
 Gimignano.

                                                  REDS
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Often a significant part of the blend in Carmignano, and sometimes blended
 in very tiny amounts with sangiovese to make contemporary Chianti and Chianti Classico. It is the sole
 grape variety or a component in some Super Tuscan wines.
 CANAIOLO: Historically the second red grape, besides sangiovese, in the traditional Chianti blend.
 COLORINO: One of the historic blending grapes in the traditional Chianti blend. Contributes structure
 and a deep color (much as petit verdot does in a Bordeaux blend).
 MERLOT: Sometimes blended in small amounts with sangiovese to make contemporary Chianti and
 Chianti Classico. Also used in a limited number of Super Tuscans.
 SANGIOVESE: The major Tuscan grape used for all the important traditional red wines of the region—
 Chianti, Chianti Classico, brunello di Montalcino, and vino nobile di Montepulciano.

   Sangiovese is, like pinot noir, an exacting, troublesome grape. It doesn’t ripen easily or
uniformly. In sites that are not consistently sunny, or in rainy, overcast years, it’s common
around harvest time to see bunches with soft, purple, ripe grapes as well as slightly green,
underripe ones. Unevenly ripe bunches can lead to thin, unbalanced wines that taste like
sweet-and-sour sauce if the grower doesn’t pick out (often by hand) all of the green,
unripe berries.
   There’s another vexing issue: Italy is literally strewn with multiple clones of
sangiovese. Although no one knows precisely how many different clones there are,
winemakers are convinced that the main ones vary enormously in flavor, and that the
future of Tuscan wine lies in clonal research. The world’s most ambitious study of grape
clones was begun in Chianti Classico in 1987. Known as the Chianti Classico 2000
project, it was financed by the European Union and took sixteen years to complete. In just
the small Chianti Classico region alone, 239 clones of sangiovese were identified and
studied, along with other viticultural factors (rootstock, trellising methods, and so on).
From this research, seven clones of sangiovese were selected, officially registered, and
named “Chianti Classico 2000” clones for their superior quality and viral resistance.
Hand sorting sangiovese grapes at Castello di Fonterutoli. The estate, owned by the Mazzei family since 1435, includes
             a villa, a small church, and 1,600 acres (650 hectares) of forest, vineyards, and olive groves.

   As for cabernet sauvignon, although it was brought to Tuscany in the eighteenth
century, reportedly by Grand Duke Cosimo de’ Medici III, the variety was largely
unimportant for centuries except as a component in Carmignano (see page 392). In the late
1970s and 1980s, however, cabernet achieved greater prominence as one of the varieties
of grapes used in the Super Tuscans.
   White grapes have never been very important in Tuscany, although, in the past, an
enormous number of neutral trebbiano Toscano and somewhat more interesting malvasia
(malvasia bianca lunga, specifically) vines were planted. The best of these grapes were
(and still are) used to make vin santo, while the remainder were mostly used in red wines
—in particular, Chianti and vino nobile di Montepulciano. Even vernaccia, the grape of
vernaccia di San Gimignano and the only white grape of any character, still makes what
most Italian experts consider a serviceable, occasionally charming white at best.
    As for chardonnay and other international whites, there are far fewer examples in
Tuscany than there are in Friuli-Venezia Giulia or Trentino-Alto Adige. That said, unlike
in those regions, chardonnay is relatively new in Tuscany. Beginning in the 1980s, several
Tuscan winemakers decided to make what they called “serious” white wines, which turned
out to mean big-bodied, oaky, buttery chardonnays and fruit-packed sauvignon blancs.
These wines are not made on a large scale. The most impressive of them include the rich
Capannelle chardonnay, as well as Poggio alle Gazze (hill of the magpies), the sauvignon
blanc from Ornellaia (where magpies do live in the vineyard).

       The word sangiovese is thought to derive from the Latin sanguis Jovis—“the
       blood of Jupiter.” The name is said to have been given to the wine by monks
       residing near Monte Giove (Mount Jupiter), in Emilia-Romagna.
                        A FIASCO BY ANY OTHER NAME…
If you were of a certain age in the U.S. in the 1960s, you remember Woodstock, the early Beatles, and
putting candles into the round, straw-covered bottle nearly every Chianti used to come in—called,
technically, a fiasco. The word, probably of medieval Italian origin, described a glass bottle or flask with a
long neck and a bulbous body, usually covered in wicker or straw for protection. Historically, both wine
and olive oil came in fiaschi. According to The Oxford English Dictionary, the word fiasco—meaning “a
failure or complete breakdown”—comes from the Italian expression fare fiasco, to make a bottle. How
this Italian expression came to mean a foul-up is unknown. Some wine experts have speculated that the
poor quality of past Chianti may be the reason. Today in Tuscany one still finds old trattorias called
fiaschetterias—working men’s taverns known initially for cheap, hearty Tuscan wines and later for the
homey Tuscan specialties that went with them.
     CHIANTI, CHIANTI CLASSICO, AND THE SUPER
                     TUSCANS

What is called the Chianti zone (including all of the subdistricts of Chianti and Chianti
Classico) covers a vast territory encompassing most of central Tuscany—more than
38,000 acres (15,400 hectares). Wines were made here as far back as the thirteenth
century, when records document “Chianti wine” being made in the “Chianti Mountains”
around Florence. Interestingly, some records suggest that this first Chianti wine may have
been white.
   This is a place of inspiring beauty. Vineyards share the hillsides with olive groves,
cypresses, umbrella pines, castles, and centuries-old stone farmhouses. Since ancient
times, artists and poets have been captivated by the lucid softness of the daylight, which
seems as though it has been brushed onto the sky with a feather.




                          Old-style Chianti fiaschi—memories of a former time.

    In this section, we will look at Chianti and its subdistricts, as well as Chianti Classico. I
know that it might seem as if Chianti Classico is simply the “top level” of Chianti, but the
two wines are distinctly different. Indeed, each has its own DOCG and thus its own set of
stringent rules. This means that you can’t make Chianti in Chianti Classico, and you can’t
make Chianti Classico in Chianti.
                      SOME OF THE TOP SUPER TUSCANS
Many of what are considered Italy’s superstar wines were first made in Tuscany in the 1970s and 1980s.
Generally flamboyant, powerful, highly structured, and wrapped in the vanilla robe of flavor that new oak
imparts, they are wines that try to be international, yet evoke Italianness at the same time. The collective
name for these wines, the Super Tuscans, is a consumer term, not an official designation. Each wine
listed below has its own proprietary name; the words Super Tuscan never appear on the label. Note that
some producers make more than one Super Tuscan wine.

PROPRIETARY NAME                PRODUCER                         MAIN GRAPE

Cepparello                      Isole e Olena                    sangiovese

Coltassala                      Castello di Volpaia              sangiovese

Excelsus                        Castello Banfi                   merlot

Flaccianello della Pieve        Fontodi                          sangiovese

Fontalloro                      Fèlsina                          sangiovese

Grosso Sanese                   Il Palazzino                     sangiovese

I Sodi di San Niccolò           Castellare                       sangiovese

Il Sodaccio                     Montevertine                     sangiovese

Le Pergole Torte                Montevertine                     sangiovese

Masseto                         Ornellaia                        merlot

Monte Antico                    Monte Antico                     sangiovese

Olmaia                          Col d’Orcia                      cabernet sauvignon

Ornellaia                       Ornellaia                        cabernet sauvignon

Percarlo                        San Giusto                       sangiovese

Sammarco                        Castello dei Rampolla            cabernet sauvignon

                                Marchesi Incisa della
Sassicaia                                                        cabernet sauvignon
                                Rocchetta

Solaia                          Antinori                         cabernet sauvignon

Summus                          Castello Banfi                   cabernet sauvignon

Terrine                         Castello della Paneretta         canaiolo

Tignanello                      Antinori                         sangiovese

Tinscvil                        Monsanto                         sangiovese

 Vigna d’Alceo                   Castello dei Rampolla           cabernet sauvignon
                   BOLGHERI: BIRTHPLACE OF SASSICAIA
 In 1944, a nobleman named Mario Incisa della Rocchetta planted Tuscany’s first cabernet sauvignon
 vineyard on a stony/sandy hill (1,200 feet/366 meters in altitude) in a sunny commune called
 Castiglioncello. It was, in every way, unusual. First, there was the fact that the vines were cabernet
 (reportedly from Chateau Lafite Rothschild) not sangiovese. Second, the wine was aged in small, new
 French oak barrels. Third, the vineyard wasn’t anywhere near the Chianti zone, nor near the brunello
 town of Montalcino, nor the vino nobile town of Montepulciano.
    The vineyard was in the far west of Tuscany, along the coast of the Tyrrhenian Sea in an area known
 as the Maremma, in a district then known for peach orchards—Bolgheri. (Tuscan viticultural wisdom at
 the time held that no great red wine could be made from vineyards close to the sea.) Incisa della
 Rochetta called the wine Sassicaia—from Tuscan dialect, sasso for rock, and aia, used like the letter y is,
 in English, to make the word an adjective—that is, rocky. Thus, Sassicaia—rocky place. For twenty
 years, it was a wine produced only for the family’s use. Finally, in 1968, Sassicaia was released
 commercially, bearing the blue-and-white label we know today. Quiet Bolgheri achieved considerable
 notoriety, but it was just the beginning. Today, several top producers in the region make remarkable wine.
 The top estates include Ornellaia, Guado al Tasso, Grattamacco, Macchiole, and Michele Satta.
 Cabernet sauvignon remains the leading red grape, with merlot and cabernet franc following. Several
 Bolgheri estates also make simple but fantastic vermentinos for every-night drinking.



CHIANTI AND THE SUPER TUSCANS
A modern memoir of basic Chianti would probably begin with its role as the companion to
spaghetti and (if you were well-to-do) meatballs. Not that this association is necessarily
pejorative. After World War II, especially, being cheap and gulpable was pretty ideal. But
as the mid decades of the twentieth century went on, Chianti grew increasingly
disappointing. Part of the problem was the historic so-called Chianti formula.
    Traditionally Chianti was a blend of grapes: red—sangiovese, canaiolo, and colorino—
and white—malvasia and/or trebbiano. The formula was formalized in the mid-1800s by
Baron Bettino Ricasoli (second prime minister of the united Italy), whose family had been
making Tuscan wine since the twelfth century. Ricasoli posited that adding a small amount
of white malvasia bianca lunga (known simply as malvasia in Tuscany) to Chianti would
heighten its vivacity, boost its flavor, and make it more drinkable when young. Embedded
in this notion were the beginnings of disaster.
   The more popular Chianti became, the more it was lightened with white grapes—and
not just malvasia, as Ricasoli had intended, but also the fairly dull type of trebbiano
known as trebbiano Toscano (which, in France, was and still is used as neutral distilling
material for Cognac). Far from adding character to Chianti, trebbiano turned it into an
anorexic red. Yet, by World War II, trebbiano made up more than 30 percent of some
Chiantis. In 1967, the Italian government used the “Ricasoli formula” of a sangiovese-
based blend with 10 percent to 30 percent malvasia and trebbiano as the legal foundation
for the Chianti DOC (it wasn’t until 1984, after numerous changes in the regulations, that
Chianti was given the higher designation of DOCG).
                 The moody sky over a villa in Bolgheri, near the western coast of Tuscany.

   Meanwhile, trouble was brewing in the vineyards. In the economic aftermath of the
war, winegrowers were given agricultural development funds by the government, and the
Chianti area was enlarged. And, to quickly meet the demand for affordable Chianti,
winegrowers (often unknowingly) planted easily accessible, different types of sangiovese,
clones collectively known as sangiovese di Romagna brought in from the nearby region of
Emilia-Romagna (which is not, for the most part, known for excellent red wine). Given
overproduction, poorly situated vineyards, ill-suited clonal types, and dilution with weak-
flavored white grapes, the quality of Chianti collapsed. By the 1970s, Italian romance
notwithstanding, Chianti was bought as much for its straw-covered bottle (the candle-
holder of the era) as for the liquid inside.




   Faced with the possibility of the industry’s demise, a handful of innovative,
iconoclastic producers in the mid-1970s began taking the first steps toward making wines
that would be the polar opposites of “spaghetti Chianti.” Their inspiration was Sassicaia
(dialect for “rocky place”), made by Marchese Mario Incisa della Rocchetta at his estate,
Tenuta San Guido, near the Tuscan coast, in Bolgheri (see box, facing page).
   The first Sassicaias—a tiny production made in the late 1940s—were awkward, even
coarse wines. But by the late 1960s, Incisa della Rocchetta had refined his techniques
considerably and the wine, defying expectation, turned out to be very impressive. Among
the wine’s admirers was Piero Antinori; the Incisa della Rocchettas were his cousins.
Antinori himself was the head of a centuries-old Tuscan winemaking family. Thus,
Sassicaia became the catalyst for Antinori’s Tignanello—the first well-known non-Chianti
Chianti.
                                             THE ETRUSCANS
  From 800 to 300 B.C. the Etruscans, an ancient civilization of highly cultured people, lived in what is now
  Tuscany. Many of the hilltops where they built their flourishing villages are now blanketed by a pastoral
  carpet of vines. Some historians believe the Etruscans were the first purely indigenous Italian race. But
  their almond-shaped eyes and slanting eyebrows led others to suggest that they may have migrated from
  Asia Minor. Elaborate Etruscan tombs, funerary drawings, and grave artifacts depict a vibrant society of
  aristocrats and slaves that formed a culture that was both obsessed with ceremony and superstitious.
  Divination, for example, was performed by “reading” the entrails of freshly slaughtered animals, the flight
  of birds, or flashes of lightning during thunderstorms. Tomb murals portray sybaritic banquets, full of wine
  drinking, dancing, and athletic contests. Later, this hedonism, along with Etruscan military pageantry,
  would profoundly affect the Romans who, by the end of the third century B.C., defeated and dissolved
  the Etruscan world.




Barrels in the old cellars of Castello di Volpaia. More than an estate, Castello di Volpaia was built in the 11th century as
    a fortified village on the border between Florence and Siena. Part of the original protective walls and two of the
                                       village’s six medieval towers are still standing.

   Made in 1971, Tignanello contained no white grapes, was based almost entirely on
sangiovese (later, cabernet sauvignon and cabernet franc were added), and was aged in
small, new French oak barrels. Tignanello was like a flashlight in the dark. Other top
producers immediately followed suit, making expensive proprietary wines of their own,
sometimes from sangiovese blended with cabernet sauvignon, sometimes from either
grape alone. What unified these wines was what they were not: They were not made
according to the traditional Chianti formula specified at that time in the DOC laws (see the
Appendix on Wine Laws, page 924). As a result, the government considered them mere
vini da tavola (“table wines”); the press nicknamed them the Super Tuscans.
   The eclectic group of Super Tuscans motivated winemakers to further improve the
quality of Chianti. In 1984, Chianti was elevated from DOC to DOCG status, paving the
way for additional improvements and many subsequent changes. Still, basic Chianti—
especially when it’s moderately priced—is often a lean, old-fashioned wine, tasting less of
fruit than of earth, dried leaves, wet rocks, and damp bark, and possessing a characteristic,
appealing bitterness. No longer are white grapes a mandatory part of the Chianti formula.
Indeed, basic modern Chianti can be anywhere from 75 percent to up to 100 percent
sangiovese, should the winemaker choose. Canaiolo can comprise no more than 10
percent of the blend, and so-called “other authorized reds” (like cabernet sauvignon and
merlot) can make up no more than 15 percent of the blend. The white grapes malvasia and
trebbiano can still be used (although they rarely are) for up to 10 percent of the blend.
   Thus far we’ve been talking about basic Chianti, but within the large Chianti zone are
eight subzones. One of these—Chianti Classico—is so distinct, it has its own DOCG, and
we’ll explore it in a moment. But the other seven are very much worth knowing, for the
wines are usually a big step up in quality from basic Chianti, and many of the top wines
from these regions have a delicious, Old World Italian flavor—what might be called a
traditional high-quality Chianti flavor. This is, in part, a result of the fact that many
producers in these zones still use the traditional barrels used in Chianti—large Slavonian
oak casks rather than small French oak barrels. The percentages in the blend for Chianti
with a named subzone are slightly different than for basic Chianti. These wines can be up
to 20 percent of “other authorized reds,” not 15 percent.
                                           VIRGINAL VALUE
 For centuries around the Mediterranean, vines and olive trees have grown side by side (sometimes
 literally entwined), often in soil so arid little else will grow there. The bond between the two crops is
 especially strong in Tuscany, where many wine estates double as top olive oil producers, and where the
 extra virgin olive oil is considered among the best in the world. The three varieties of olives used—
 frantoio, maraiolo, and lecciono—are known respectively for their fruitiness, spiciness, and richness.
 Because Tuscany is cold in the fall, the olives are harvested early, before potential frosts—so early that
 Tuscan olives are picked green, before they are fully ripe (most other olives worldwide are harvested
 after they ripen, when they are black). Olives that are not fully ripe give Tuscan oil its classic lime green
 color, an almost herbal freshness, an explosive fruitiness, and a kind of peppery bite. Among the finest
 producers of Tuscan extra virgin olive oil are the wine producers Antinori, Avignonesi, Caparzo,
 Castellare, Castello di Ama, Castello di Fonterutoli, Castello di Volpaia, and Fattoria di Fèlsina.

   Also, you’ll see the names of the subzone on the wine’s label. The subzones are
(clockwise from the north): Colli Fiorentini, south of the city of Florence; Montespertoli,
located within Colli Fiorentini around the commune of Montespertoli; Chianti Rufina, in
the northeastern part of the zone around the commune of Rufina; Colli Aretini, in the
Arezzo province to the east; Colli Senesi, in the Siena hills; Colline Pisane, the
westernmost subzone in the province of Pisa; and Montalbano, in the northwest part of the
zone.
  The best wines from these zones are very fine, and in particular, wines from Chianti
Rufina can be stunning. Among the best Rufinas are those produced by Castello di
Nipozzano, the estate owned by the Frescobaldi family (one such Frescobaldi wine,
Montesodi, is renowned), as well as those produced by Selvapiana. Finally, by definition,
Chianti today is always a red wine. There is no such thing as white Chianti.




 Filippo and Francesco Mazzei, the 24th generation of the Mazzei family to own Castello di Fonterutoli, one of the top
                                            estates in Chianti Classico.


CHIANTI CLASSICO
Historically, the area that yielded the richest, fullest Chianti was the original, small, hilly
central region known as Chianti Classico. In 1984, the uniqueness of Chianti Classico was
underscored when it was given a DOCG of its own.
                                 THE LAW OF MEZZADRIA
 As late as 1960, the relationship of landowners to land workers in Italy was feudal in nature and
 governed by the law of mezzadria. For centuries, much of the Italian countryside had been divided into
 many fattorie (“large farms”) owned by wealthy, aristocratic, often absent landowners. Each fattoria was
 made up of ten to twelve poderi (“small farms”). Each podere covered about 20 acres and was worked by
 one peasant family (the mezzadri). The agriculture of the podere was promiscuo—a mixture of olives,
 corn, wheat, wine grapes, vegetables, fruit trees, sheep, and chickens—virtually everything the literally
 penniless working family needed to survive. Of the total production, 51 percent went to the landowner;
 the mezzadri (from mezza, meaning “half”) kept 49 percent as payment for their labor. The system—
 essentially sharecropping—kept the mezzadri in a constant state of poverty, and ensured an
 incapacitating status quo among landowners who relied on unpaid labor to keep agriculture afloat.
    In the 1950s and 1960s the system of mezzadria slowly dissolved, but not without a huge impact on
 Italian farms (many of which were abandoned), agriculture (which subsequently became far more
 industrialized), and social structure (farmers moved to better-paying jobs in cities). In Tuscany, where
 many deserted properties were later bought and restored as second homes for upper-middle-class city
 dwellers, wine estates are often still known as either fattorie or poderi (Fattoria di Fèlsina, Fattoria di
 Montevertine, Podere Il Palazzino). And some small Tuscan vineyards remain as they have been for
 decades, planted not only with several varieties of grapes but also with fruit and olive trees scattered
 among the vines.

   The mesoclimates of Chianti Classico are multiple and diverse, thanks to the
undulating hills and the variations in geology. The ancient communes of Panzano, Radda,
Gaiole, and Castellina, for example, slope toward the basin of Siena—once a prehistoric
lake. The Tyrrhenian Sea is close enough to bring cooling, dry breezes that help minimize
the humidity. The grapes, the best of which are planted on south- and southwest-facing
slopes, mature gradually over a long summer of warm Mediterranean days and cool
nights.
    If the mesoclimates are diverse, so are the soils. Many of what are considered the best
sites are on well-drained, fractured rock and stone, including the schist locally known as
galestro. These give the most structured wines. But there are also sites interspersed with
limestone, which tend to yield wines higher in acidity, and sites with more clay, which is
less well drained and tends to lead to gentler, softer wines.
   By law, Chianti Classico can be composed of 80 to 100 percent sangiovese, and up to
20 percent canaiolo, colorino, cabernet sauvignon, and/or merlot. Riservas—Chianti
Classicos that have been aged for an extra period of time (see facing page)—must abide
by these percentages as well.
   A word about cabernet sauvignon, which sometimes figures in small amounts in the
Chianti Classico blend. Unlike sangiovese, cabernet is relatively easy to grow and make
into wine, and it’s a known commodity in the international wine marketplace. But from a
flavor standpoint, the two grapes are odd bedfellows. Sangiovese, after all, tends to be
delicate and high in acidity; cabernet is dense, bold, and high in tannin. It’s easy for even
small amounts of cabernet to take over a wine’s flavor, leaving the delicate nuances of
sangiovese far behind. Tuscan winemakers have been well aware of this challenge for a
good three decades. In every wine where cabernet is part of the blend, the goal is to allow
the flavors of sangiovese to shine through, and indeed, some of the most balanced and
nuanced Chianti Classicos are now being made.
   The best basic Chianti Classicos have plum and dried cherry flavors and sometimes a
touch of salt and spice. The more structured, complex, and elegant wines from this region
are the Chianti Classico Riservas—aged, by law, at least two years in wood and three
months in bottle. Many are aged longer and most are aged, at least partially, in small, new
French oak barrels. Riservas are generally made only in the best vintage years, from
grapes that come from selected vineyard sites. Produced in these great years, riservas can
develop mesmerizing waves of refined, savory aromas and flavors: fig, chocolate, cedar,
dried orange, earth, smoke, saddle leather, prune, minerals, salt, and exotic spices.
Paradoxically, these flavors can seem both supple and explosive at the same time. They
are flavors that linger long after you’ve swallowed.
    And finally, in 2013, the Chianti Classico producers created an even higher category of
quality than riserva. Called Gran Selezione, it is only for wines made from estate-grown
grapes, and the wine must be aged thirty months (including three months in bottle) before
it is sold.
        SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF CHIANTI CLASSICO RISERVA
   Antinori • Badia a Coltibuono • Castellare • Castello dei Rampolla • Castello della Paneretta • Castello di
    Ama • Castello di Volpaia • Fattoria di Fèlsina • Fattoria Selvapiana • Fonterutoli • Fontodi • Il Molino di
                Grace • Monsanto • Rocca di Castagnoli • Ruffino • San Felice • Villa Cafaggio




Franco Biondi Santi, whose family discovered the highly flavorful brunello clone of sangiovese. This and other efforts by
                   the family helped establish brunello di Montalcino as one of Italy’s great wines.
                     BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO

Brunello (dialect for “the nice dark one”) is Tuscany’s most revered wine. It is also
Tuscany’s rarest, most expensive, and longest lived. It is made around Montalcino, a
walled medieval village clinging to a rocky hilltop, about an hour’s drive south of Chianti
Classico. (Montalcino is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.) This southern region is warmer
and, as a result, the wines have historically been fuller-bodied, more powerful, and
sometimes more dramatic than Chiantis. They have always been based on sangiovese
alone, which in these hilltop vineyards seems to possess all the nuance of aroma and
flavor needed to make a layered, complex, lavish, decadent wine, even without the help of
other varieties.
   The vineyards of brunello di Montalcino cover a modest area of approximately 5,200
acres (2,100 hectares). (The total Chianti zone, including Chianti Classico, by comparison,
covers more than 38,000 acres/15,400 hectares.) The best vineyards, as well as the village,
are some 1,800 feet (550 meters) above sea level, where they are blanketed by a luminous
swatch of sunshine. In the spring, the light in Montalcino is unlike any in the rest of
Tuscany. There is more limestone in the soil than there is in Chianti, and there are strips of
clay, schist, volcanic soil, and plots of the crumbly marl called galestro. The best
vineyards are planted on slopes facing south and southwest. Like a giant rock curtain, the
Monte Amiata range to the southeast helps to protect the vineyards from sudden rain and
hail.
   Brunello di Montalcino is not made from the clones of sangiovese that are typically the
source of Chianti but, instead, from a series of special clones collectively called brunello.
(Historically, brunello was thought to be a single clone, but is now considered to be a
collection of related clones.) In good years, the brunello clones yield a lavish wine,
fleshier in texture than Chianti, with complex, “dark” aromas and flavors of blackberry,
black cherry, and black raspberry fruit, and chocolate, violet, tar, cinnamon, and leather.
By law, brunello di Montalcino must be aged longer than most other Italian wines.
Regular brunello can be released only after five years of aging; riserva brunello, only after
six. How the wine is aged is also dictated. For regular brunello, at least two of the five
years must be in oak and the wine must spend four months in the bottle. For riserva
brunello, two of the six years must be in oak, and the wine must spend at least six months
in bottle.
   The kinds of barrels used for aging vary, resulting in two extremely different styles of
wine. Traditional producers still use large, old Slavonian oak casks, which allow the wine
to age and evolve but which do not impart significant character themselves. More modern
producers use small, new French oak barrels, which give the wine more structure and an
unmistakable note of sweet vanilla. And many producers, creating a third style, use a
combination of both, so that oak flavors are present but more subtle.
   In great vintages, brunello can take on stunning elegance, suppleness, and
concentration. The flavors seem almost animate as they somersault over themselves and
out of the glass. The combination of unctuous textures and deep, savory aromas and
flavors is, needless to say, captivating.
    Brunello di Montalcino has a reputation for longevity, and indeed many brunello di
Montalcino producers feel the wine attains its full potential for complexity and a velvety
texture only after significant aging. One of the most legendary wines in this regard—not
just in Tuscany, but in Italy—is the Biondi-Santi brunello di Montalcino. After a hundred
years of aging, it can still be remarkable, with fragile but complex flavors that almost
tremble in the mouth. Brunello di Montalcino was initially the vision and creation of
Ferruccio Biondi Santi who, in the 1870s, isolated a brunello clone of sangiovese and
planted it throughout the vineyards at his estate, Il Greppo, some 1,790 feet (550 meters)
above sea level. Biondi Santi’s brunello could not have been more unconventional. At the
time, most of the wine made in Montalcino was sweet and white. Those who preferred red
drank Chianti, much of which was light in style and not very ageworthy. Biondi Santi’s
brunello di Montalcino was the exact opposite: ample in body, packed with flavor,
intensely colored, and capable of being cellared for decades. Having isolated the clone he
wanted, Biondi Santi went on to limit the yields of his vines and then, during
fermentation, to let the grape skins sit with the juice for maximum color extraction. He
aged the resulting wines for years before releasing them. Although common today, each of
these practices was virtually unheard of in the mid-nineteenth century, especially in a rural
village in agrarian central Italy. (The first paved road to Montalcino was completed in
1960!) In 1980, brunello di Montalcino was awarded DOCG status; it was one of the first
Italian reds to be given the designation.




 No road in Tuscany follows a straight line. All the twisting and turning helps demarcate subtle shifts in terroir. Here,
                 rolling fields of grain in the countryside between Montalcino and Montepulciano.
   Today, slightly more than two hundred producers continue to improve what has been
considered a venerable wine for the past hundred years. Most of these producers are small.
However, one producer—the American-owned firm of Banfi—is colossal. The estate,
spread over more than 7,000 acres (2,800 hectares), includes a state-of-the-art winery that
makes several wines, including a good brunello.




 The Casottino Vineyard of Conti Costanti, one of the top “old guard” producers of brunello di Montalcino. In the late
19th century, the Costanti family, along with the Biondi Santi family, were early proponents of a clone of sangiovese they
                                            called brunello (“nice dark one”).

        SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO
  Altesino • Antinori • Argiano • Biondi-Santi • Casanova di Neri • Casanuovo della Cerbaie • Case Basse •
  Cerbaiona di Diego Molinari • Ciacci Piccolomini d’Aragona • Col d’Orcia • Conti Costanti • Fattoria dei
 Barbi • Ferro di Burroni Carlo • Fornacina • Gaja • Gorelli • I Due Cipressi • La Fortuna • La Serena • Pieve
                   di Santa Restituta • Pinino • Poggio Antico • Poggio di Sotto • Uccelliera


ROSSO DI MONTALCINO
Sometimes thought of as brunello di Montalcino’s younger sibling, rosso di Montalcino is
a lighter, fruitier, less complex wine than brunello di Montalcino; it’s also a lot less
expensive. Rosso di Montalcino is usually made from grapes from the younger and/or less
ideal vineyards in Montalcino; the older and better ones are reserved for brunello di
Montalcino. The yields of rosso are not as limited as those for brunello di Montalcino.
And, by law, rosso di Montalcino must be aged one year, compared to brunello di
Montalcino’s four. In poor vintages, however, rosso di Montalcino can be a smart choice,
since many brunello di Montalcino producers declassify their brunello grapes and make
rosso di Montalcino with them instead. Only a few producers consistently make truly
exciting rosso di Montalcino. In many cases, these producers give near brunello-like
treatment to their rosso, leaving the juice in contact with the skins for a longer period than
usual and aging the wine in small oak barrels. Among the best producers of rosso di
Montalcino are Argiano, Case Basse, Conti Costanti, I Due Cipressi, and Poggio Antico.
                 VINO NOBILE DI MONTEPULCIANO

Wine has been made in and around the Tuscan town of Montepulciano since Etruscan
times. It was not until the eighteenth century, however, that the wine was given the name
vino nobile, a reference not literally to the nobleness of the wine, but rather to the
noblemen, poets, and popes who regularly drank it. Today vino nobile sometimes lives up
to the quality suggested by its name—but not always. When at their best, vino nobiles
have a spicy concentration and wonderful savory bitterness, underscored by fresh acidity.
But too many are just plain thin and tart, without sufficient structure, fruit, or flavor. In all
fairness, proponents contend that a golden period for vino nobile may dawn once
producers get a firmer grasp on clones and begin to understand better how to tame vino
nobile’s difficult combination of acidity and tannin.
   Like brunello di Montalcino and Chianti, vino nobile is made primarily from its own
set of clones of sangiovese. These are collectively called prugnolo (the word means “little
prune,” a reference to the prunelike shape, color, and aroma of the grapes). Often the
grapes are, as they are in Chianti, blended with a small amount of canaiolo, malvasia,
and/or trebbiano.




      Chianina—a breed of white cattle—is the secret behind Tuscany’s phenomenally delicious T-bone steaks.

   The vineyards of Montepulciano ring the city of Siena, near the southern end of the
Valley of Chiana. Curiously enough, Chiana may partly explain vino nobile’s prestige. The
valley is famous for a special breed of white cattle, Chianina, which is the source of
Tuscany’s renowned specialty: mammoth T-bone steaks called bistecca alla fiorentina.
Perhaps the utter perfection of these steaks led people to assume that the accompanying
wine had to be pretty incredible, too.
   Montepulciano’s vineyards are planted on broad, open slopes. At about 600 feet (180
meters) above sea level, they stand at less than half the altitude of the brunello di
Montalcino vineyards. The soil is mostly sandy clay. By law, the wines must be aged for
two years; riservas must be aged for three years. Vino nobile di Montepulciano was
granted DOCG status in 1980. Avignonesi, Poliziano, and Poderi Boscarelli are among the
best producers.
   Finally, don’t confuse vino nobile di Montepulciano, a Tuscan wine made principally
from the prugnolo clones of sangiovese, with the grape montepulciano, which is planted
throughout central and southern Italy and is a specialty of the region of Abruzzi. (Italy—
profusion of confusion!) Indeed, because these are easily mixed up, vino nobile di
Montepulciano producers are considering renaming their wine simply vino nobile.

ROSSO DI MONTEPULCIANO
As rosso di Montalcino is to brunello di Montalcino, so rosso di Montepulciano is to vino
nobile di Montepulciano, which is to say, the less expensive “younger sister.” Rosso di
Montepulciano is made from prugnolo clones of sangiovese, but the vineyards are usually
younger than the vineyards dedicated to vino nobile. The yields of rosso are not as limited
as those for vino nobile, and rosso di Montepulciano is generally aged for a shorter period
of time. All of this would seem to make rosso di Montepulciano pale in comparison to
vino nobile, but the quality is entirely dependent on the producer. The immediate splash of
fruit in some rossos can be very appealing. A bottle of Gattavecchi’s rosso di
Montepulciano served with a juicy bistecca alla fiorentina will prove the point.
                                         CARMIGNANO

It may lack the prestige of brunello di Montalcino, the popularity of Chianti, and the lucky
name of vino nobile, but Carmignano nonetheless has an important claim to fame:
cabernet sauvignon. In this tiny wine region just west of Florence, cabernet sauvignon has
been part of the Carmignano blend since the eighteenth century. Today, by law,
Carmignano must be composed of a minimum of 50 percent sangiovese, plus 10 percent to
20 percent cabernet sauvignon and cabernet franc (up to 20 percent canaiolo, 10 percent
white grapes, and 10 percent “other reds” are also allowed).




 In a sea of Tuscan sangiovese, it’s surprising to come upon vineyards planted with cabernet sauvignon and cabernet
                franc. Yet both grapes have been part of the Carmignano blend since the 18th century.


                        THE BEST WINE BARS IN FLORENCE
    Florence has a number of extremely casual wine bars, often just marble counters, which are perfect for a
    glass of Chianti plus a snack of focaccia, some pecorino cheese, or finocchiona (“fennel sausage”)
    heaped on Tuscan bread. Prices are reasonable. A few to experience: L’Antico Noè, Cantinetta da
    Verrazzano, Fuori Porta, and Le Volpi e l’Uva.
               At La Taverna di San Guiseppe in Siena, a wine tasting means multiple glasses.

    Carmignano, which has a reputation for finesse and structure, comes from a tiny area.
There are fewer than twenty producers, most of them minuscule. In fact, the wine drinker
is likely to encounter only one or two producers, and most probably the first will be the
famous estate of Villa de Cappezzana, which makes what many Italian wine lovers
consider the very best Carmignano. The estate was originally a de’ Medici villa.
                  VERNACCIA DI SAN GIMIGNANO

Although everything about Tuscany seems to put a person in the mood to drink red wine,
there is a historic white wine to consider: vernaccia di San Gimignano, traditionally
referred to as the wine that kisses, licks, bites, and stings. Actually, only the best vernaccia
di San Gimignanos do that; plenty of others—which are utterly neutral—just don’t appear
to be good at romance.
   As its name suggests, vernaccia di San Gimignano is made from vernaccia grapes
grown on the slopes surrounding the storybook medieval hill town of San Gimignano,
roughly an hour’s drive southwest of Florence. Although historically vernaccia di San
Gimignano was made and aged in large, old wood casks, the best modern versions are
young and fresh, and owe their charm to temperature-controlled stainless-steel tanks.
There are about sixty relatively small producers. The best of these include Il Cipressino,
Riccardo Falchini, Montenidoli, Pietrafitta, La Quercia di Racciano, San Quirico, and
Teruzzi & Puthod.
                                     VIN SANTO

Of the hundreds of different sweet wines produced in Italy, the best known may be vin
santo, “holy wine,” so named because priests have drunk it during Mass for centuries.
Unlike many sweet wines, however, vin santo is not served solely on ceremonious
occasions. It is the customary finale to even the humblest Tuscan meal, served after
espresso, almost always with a plate of small biscotti called cantucci, stubby, twice-baked
cookies meant for dunking.
   Most vin santo does not taste as sweet as, say, Sauternes. The wine has a delicate,
creamy, honey-roasted flavor, and the color can be unreal, from radiant amber to neon
orange. The sweetness level, however, is entirely up to the producer, and there are even
some rare vin santos that are bone-dry.
   True vin santo is expensive because the ancient process of making it remains artisanal
and labor intensive. First the grapes (generally malvasia bianca lunga or trebbiano) are
partially dried for three to six months. Although there are several ways this can be
accomplished, the preferred method is to hang them from rafters in an airy, dry attic or
room. During the drying period, nearly half of the liquid (mostly water) in the grapes
evaporates, concentrating the remaining sugar. The grapes are crushed, combined with a
madre, or “mother” (a small remnant of the thick residue from a former batch), and then
the must is left to ferment slowly for three to five years in small, sealed barrels placed in a
warm attic or loft called a vinsantaia. The barrels are commonly oak, but some producers
give the wine greater complexity by using juniper, cherry, and chestnut as well, then
blending the final lots. (This idea of using several different types of wood to contribute to
the complexity of flavor is also used in neighboring Emilia-Romagna to make the best
balsamic vinegars, and indeed, if everything does not go right, a Tuscan winemaker can
end up with some very delicious vinegar rather than vin santo.)
 The vineyards of Marchesi de Frescobaldi, with the estate’s renowned Castello di Nippozano in the background. The
Frescobaldi family, one of the original banking families of medieval Florence, has made wine for seven hundred years.


                                     STEAK ITALIAN STYLE
    If the wine list in most steak houses is any evidence, cabernet sauvignon is a steak’s best friend. Tuscany
    begs to differ. The region’s specialty, bistecca alla fiorentina—a huge, three-inch-thick slab of grilled
    Chianina beef—is always served with a wine made principally from sangiovese—especially a top Chianti
    Classico Riserva, brunello di Montalcino, or vino nobile di Montepulciano. Sangiovese, with its
    underlying bright acidity and hint of saltiness, is stunning as a counterpoint to the richness and fat of the
    beef.

   Typically families make their own vin santo for home use and as a proud offering to
guests. In addition, there are several dozen small commercial producers. Of them, these
seven make the most stunning vin santos: Avignonesi, Badia a Coltibuono, Fontodi, Isole
e Olena, San Giusto a Rentennano, Selvapiana, and I Selvatici.
   In addition, the larger producers Antinori, Barone Ricasoli, Frescobaldi, and Lungarotti
make very excellent vin santos that are not as limited in production and thus more easily
found.
                         THE FOODS OF TUSCANY

Perhaps because it was the birthplace of the Renaissance, Tuscany is often associated with
refinement, wealth, even ostentation. We assume that Tuscan cooking will exhibit these
characteristics as well, and that the cuisine will be both sumptuous and elaborate.
    Sumptuous it can be. Elaborate, almost never. Tuscan cooking is some of the humblest
in Italy. It is quite definitively poor people’s cuisine. In contrast to special-occasion dishes,
such as bistecca alla fiorentina (mammoth slabs of grilled Chianina beef), everyday meals
are more likely to be dominated by beans and bread. When other Italians want to be
derogatory, they call the Tuscans by their age-old nickname: mangiafagioli, “bean eaters.”
   But if beans are commonplace in the region’s culinary repertoire, bread is even more
so. The entire cucina of Tuscany is said to revolve around this one essential food, and in
no other region of Italy does bread seem more intimately tied to everyday life. The
Tuscans may have been among the first people to regularly use forks, but bread is a
Tuscan’s oldest and most treasured utensil. At every meal, it is enlisted to help transport
one thing or another to the mouth.




                               Tuscany revolves around olives and grapes.

    Tuscan bread, pane toscano, tastes like no other bread in Italy, mostly because it is
made without salt. In restaurants and trattorias this bread is the first thing whisked to the
table, even though great examples are, sadly enough, increasingly hard to find. (Many
trattorias now serve a cardboardlike commercial version that discriminating pigeons
would reject.) Traditionally, butter is never served alongside, nor is olive oil for dipping.
Generally, and without regard for its quality, a small cover charge for pane toscano
appears on the bill.
   Tuscan children walking to school often munch on schiacciata, a piece of flat bread
baked with olive oil and sometimes sweetened with sugar or wine grapes. Before lunch or
dinner there are always crostini, thin slices of Tuscan bread traditionally spread with an
earthy paste of chopped liver, but sometimes, in more creative cases, covered with grilled
wild mushrooms or a puree of olives and garlic. Crostini are not the same as bruschetta—
which, in any case, is not a Tuscan term but the Roman one for peasant bread that has
been grilled over a fire, brushed with olive oil, rubbed with garlic, and then possibly
topped with chopped fresh tomatoes.
   But perhaps the most glorious way to serve bread is as fettunta, a piece of toasted pane
toscano swathed with just-pressed, ripe, green, unfiltered Tuscan extra virgin olive oil.
Technically you can only eat fettunta in late fall, right after the olives have been harvested,
when the oil is at its apex. The name fettunta comes from fetta, the name workers used to
describe the hunk of bread that they anointed with intensely flavorful extra virgin olive oil
as it ran fresh from the press.




  Bread—the lifeblood of Tuscany and, along with wine, an indispensable part of the Tuscan table. Dozens of Tuscan
     specialties from panzella to crostini to ribollita depend on it when the bread is fresh, and even when it’s stale.

   In Tuscany, bread is also constantly used in cooking, especially good bread gone stale.
The homiest Tuscan soup is ribollita, made with stale bread, black Tuscan cabbage, and
beans. Panzanella, the humble and irresistibly delicious Tuscan salad, is made of stale
bread moistened with a little water and then tossed with fresh tomatoes, chopped basil,
onions, celery, and olive oil. A classic Tuscan cookbook, Con Poco o Nulla (“With Little
or Nothing”), opens with ten suggestions for using day-old bread.
   Bread made without salt has a muted, almost bland flavor. That Tuscan bakers would
intentionally choose to make their bread this way seems surprising, until you consider that
bread alone is not the issue. In the Tuscan triumvirate of bread, olive oil, and wine, the
plain pane toscano is the perfect backdrop for the pepperiness of Tuscan olive oil, and
both are delicious juxtaposed with the slight perception of saltiness in many wines made
from sangiovese grapes. Salt and pepper. Wine and bread. Liquid and solid. What more
could be asked for? Then again, perhaps this small but admirable bit of culinary
compatibility was the result of more mundane considerations. Culinary historians point
out that salt was always a precious, expensive commodity in Tuscany, and that often it was
heavily taxed. Pane toscano, it seems, could also have been a simple method of tax-
avoidance.

                            WHEN YOU VISIT… TUSCANY
         IT WAS IN FLORENCE that the Renaissance was born, and Tuscany is still a haven for
         every sort of artisan—cabinetmakers, sculptors, silversmiths, gilders, and of course,
         winemakers.
         TUSCANY’S SMALL VILLAGES and hill towns seem untouched by time. Here, no road
         even remotely resembles a straight line. One of the most beautiful is the Chiantigiana,
         the country road that twists and turns, rises and falls through the vineyards and
         woodlands that connect Florence with Siena.
         WINE ESTATES IN TUSCANY vary tremendously in size, from small farms that have
         been converted into working wine villas to large wineries. Many of these offer a full
         palette of gastronomical possibilities, so in addition to tasting the estate’s wines, you
         might be able to taste its olive oils and honey, or take a cooking class, or sample the
         local cheeses.
         TUSCAN WINE ESTATES are almost always a challenge to find. There are rarely any
         signs or street addresses on the properties themselves, and you can forget the GPS.
         The best bet is to meander around the nearest village and ask for specific directions
         from a waiter in a local bar or café. Of course, it’s hard to get truly lost in Tuscany: Dirt
         paths off the main road almost always end at some wine estate.
         MOST WINE TOWNS have a local consorzio, or governing body, for that wine region.
         The consorzio can give you an overview of winemaking in the region, provide you with
         maps, and suggest producers to visit.
         ABOVE ALL, NO WINE TRIP to Tuscany would be complete without a visit to the
         enoteca in Siena, a former de’Medici fortress. Hundreds of wines from all over the
         country are available there for tasting.
                           The Tuscan Wines to Know
While white wines are made in Tuscany, the wines of most importance, including the ones below, are all red.




                                   FATTORIA DI FÈLSINA BERARDENGA

                                   CHIANTI CLASSICO RISERVA | RANCIA
                                                 100% sangiovese
The Fèlsina estate is in the southeast corner of Chianti Classico, in the district of Castelnuovo Berardenga, where
the soils are marine sediments and alberese, a type of marl limestone with a high concentration of calcium
carbonate. Indeed, all of the wines have amazing aromas that suggest prehistoric sea beds, iodine, and minerals.
They are sophisticated wines that start out subtle and then zoom forward on the palate, with bitter cherries steeped
in liqueur, damp bark, spices, and dried rose petals. The winery’s basic Chianti Classicos always have classic
flavors and flair, but I especially like their riserva wine, called Rancia, the grapes for which come from a single
parcel that used to be part of a Benedictine monastery.
                                             BADIA A COLTIBUONO

                                         CHIANTI CLASSICO RISERVA
                                         90% sangiovese, 10% canaiolo
Badia a Coltibuono (“Abbey of the Good Harvest”) dates from the eleventh century and was founded by the
Vallombrosan order of reformed Benedictine monks. In the mid-1800s, the estate was acquired by the Giuntini
family and eventually was passed down to an heir, Piero Stucchi Prinetti, who, with his family, set about
transforming the estate into a superb modern property devoted to wine and food. (Lorenza de’Medici, the wife of
the late Piero Stucchi Prinetti, and as close to a Renaissance woman as it gets, is a famous cookbook author and the
founder of the estate’s acclaimed cooking school.) The wines, of course, are the heart of the estate, and they are
delicious—especially the Chianti Classico Riserva, with its autumnlike flavors of woods, mushrooms, withered
leaves, wet bark, truffles, damp soil, and small wild berries. I have always loved the leathery grip of this wine, and
the way it incites hunger for a richly sauced pasta.
                                                    FONTODI

                                        FLACCIANELLO DELLA PIEVE
                                                100% sangiovese
Flaccianello della Pieve is named for a Christian cross in the village of Pieve, but this wine comes from the village
of Panzano, and specifically the impressive amphitheater of steep hillside vineyards outside the town. This is a wine
you can drink once and remember forever. Precise in its delineated flavors, distinctive in character, and exuding
finesse, it’s one of the most exotic sangioveses made—syrupy-rich in texture, exceptionally complex, and dappled
with uncommon flavors, such as incense, ginger, black licorice, and persimmon. Most impressive of all is the way
the wine explodes on the palate with sappy juiciness. Fontodi, a small estate owned by Giovanni Manetti, also
makes astounding Chianti Classico Riserva.
                                                  MONTEVERTINE

                                                LE PERGOLE TORTE
                                                   100% sangiovese
From the small estate of Montevertine, in the commune of Radda—one of the coolest spots in Chianti Classico—
comes Le Pergole Torte (“the twisted stake” in Italian, a reference to the old vine training method used in 1968,
when the vineyards were planted). One of the first 100 percent sangioveses in Chianti Classico, Le Pergole Torte is
a wine that incites sheer emotion in its drinkers. It is a selection of the estate’s best lots, and is richly textured yet
vividly precise. Its dramatic flavors—black cherry, black fig, vanilla, violets, and orange peel—flash across the
palate like slashing knives. Like the stylized woman on its label, the wine seems powerful and yet mysteriously
feminine at the same time.
                                                   ANTINORI

                                                 TIGNANELLO
               Approximately 80% sangiovese, plus cabernet sauvignon and cabernet franc
Tignanello, the first well-known Super Tuscan, is the red wine that carved out a radically new direction for Tuscan
winemaking and, in the process, galvanized the creative spirit of winemakers throughout Italy. When it was first
made in 1971, Tignanello contained no cabernet, but from the beginning it was aged in small, French-oak barrels.
By the early 1990s, after a few slight changes in the blend and the winemaking method, some of the best
Tignanellos ever were being made. In the finest vintages, Tignanello possesses a fantastic aroma of bitter cherries
and exotic spices. These open up into a wine that is primordial and dark (I always think of Joseph Conrad’s Heart
of Darkness). The savory, salty flavors have a deep deliciousness about them—like long-simmered meat juices. But
best of all, Tignanello has vibrancy and energy, as if its concentration can’t wait to be unleashed.
                                                   POLIZIANO

                                     VINO NOBILE DI MONTEPULCIANO
                   85% sangiovese (prugnolo clones), plus colorino, canaiolo, and merlot
Poliziano’s vino nobile is noble indeed. The wine’s blast of savory, briny black olive and espresso flavors is
delicious and just waiting for the traditional accompaniment to vino nobile—bistecca alla fiorentina, a huge, three-
inch-thick slab of grilled Chianina beef. Like so many top Tuscan wines, Poliziano’s vino nobile is beautifully
structured and sophisticated. It is not about fruit, but rather, belongs to the sensory world of expensive Italian
leather, fine espresso, and gourmet chocolate. The name Poliziano is an homage to humanist poet Angelo
Ambrogini (1454–1494), known as Il Poliziano, who was born in Montepulciano.
                                              CONTI COSTANTI

                                        BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO
                                      100% sangiovese (brunello clones)
Andrea Costanti makes some of the richest, yet most elegant and completely fascinating, brunellos in Montalcino.
The wine—as all great wines do—takes you on a taste journey. This one goes from savory grilled herbs and sea salt
to violets and black licorice, to cranberries and blueberries. The explosive finish leaves you with echoes of rich
fruits, espresso, and minerals. Costanti’s wines always have a fineness, a pedigree, a beauty. They are sumptuous
and sophisticated, and never overdone.
                                                       GAJA

                  BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO | PIEVE SANTA RESTITUTA | RENNINA
                                       100% sangiovese (brunello clones)
Angelo Gaja made his name in Piedmont working with (high-tannin) nebbiolo grapes, but in 1994 he acquired the
Pieve Santa Restituta estate, and he has a deft hand with (high-acid) sangiovese as well. The Rennina, broad on the
palate, shows a side of sangiovese that almost doesn’t exist: sumptuousness. The wine is smooth and rich, but
sangiovese’s classic saline, spice, and forest floor flavors are there, too. The combination makes for a fascinating
brunello. The estate itself is behind the seventh-century church Santa Restituta, which the Gaja family is restoring.
The name of the wine—Rennina—is what the estate was called in the late Middle Ages.
                                                BIONDI-SANTI

                                  BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO | RISERVA
                                      100% sangiovese (brunello clones)
The brunello clone was first isolated and propagated by the Biondi Santi family around 1870. They were the only
estate to produce brunello di Montalcino until after the Second World War, when several other producers joined the
ranks. This is the most legendary estate in Montalcino and also the most traditional. Wines here (both the riserva
and the regular Brunello) have been made in essentially the same manner for nearly a century, and the grapes come
from a perfect, high-altitude vineyard. The Biondi-Santi wines age in large, old Slavonian oak casks, where they
evolve painstakingly slowly. When they emerge, however, they are fascinating, complex wines with stunning
elegance and balance.
Mountain huts used by shepherds and farmers are scattered throughout the narrow alpine valleys of Trentino-Alto Adige
                                   with the majestic Dolomites towering above.
OTHER IMPORTANT
WINE REGIONS

   TRENTINO-ALTO ADIGE | LOMBARDY | LIGURIA | EMILIA-ROMAGNA
  UMBRIA | ABRUZZI | THE SOUTHERN PENINSULA: CAMPANIA, APULIA,
         BASILICATA, AND CALABRIA | SICILY AND SARDINIA
Italy is a treasure trove of vineyards, from Trentino-Alto Adige on the border of the Alps
to the island of Sicily off the North African coast. No province here is without vines. I’ve
covered the “big four” (Piedmont, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, and Tuscany). Following
are what I consider the next most important Italian regions to know, each of which has
delicious wine specialties.
                         TRENTINO-ALTO ADIGE

No Italian wine region extends farther north than Trentino-Alto Adige, where pristine
vineyards carpet narrow Alpine valleys as high as 3,600 feet (1,100 meters) in elevation.
The sheer rock faces of the forebodingly beautiful Dolomites (part of the Alps) rise up
majestically and virtually perpendicularly behind the vines. These are some of the most
breathtaking vineyards in the world (and the Alto Adige part of the region, in particular,
gets my vote as one of the most gorgeous wine regions in all of Europe).
   This is the sunny, south-facing side of the Alps and so, despite Trentino-Alto Adige’s
northern latitude, the vineyard-covered valleys are warm enough during summer to ripen
grapes. The soil is also ideal. Well drained and laced with limestone, it was created by
glacial and alluvial deposits of gravel, sand, and clay.
    Trentino-Alto Adige, despite its hyphen, is really two distinct provinces. Trentino, in
the south, is primarily Italian-speaking. But in Alto Adige, nestled beneath Austria in the
north, German, not Italian, is the primary language (and both languages can appear on
wine labels). The district takes its modern name from the river Adige, the second longest
in Italy, which runs through its middle. But the area’s historic name is the Südtirol (South
Tyrol), a reference to its Austrian past. (Alto Adige was ceded to Italy by Austria after
World War I.) Politics, however, don’t always amend the ideology of a place, and for
many residents of Alto Adige, the Südtirol is still the name of the place where they live,
and goulash is a more familiar dish than polenta.
   While cultural differences between Trentino and Alto Adige can run deep, the best
producers in the two provinces share a common ideology when it comes to wine. Like
Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino-Alto Adige brings a northern, even Teutonic sensibility to
winemaking. This is especially true of Alto Adige, where the top producers—such
wineries as Alois Lageder, J. Hofstätter, Pojer e Sandri, Tiefenbrunner, Casòn
Hirschprunn, Cantina Tramin, and Zeni, to name a few—make wines of ravishing beauty.
   Trentino-Alto Adige is home to a vast range of local and international grape varieties.
Among the most important white grapes are pinot grigio, traminer aromatico,
gewürztraminer, sylvaner, Müller-Thurgau, pinot blanc, and chardonnay, the last having
been grown in the region since the mid-nineteenth century. (Cantina Terlano’s Nova
Domus—a blend of pinot blanc and chardonnay—is one of the top white wines of the
region.)
   Interestingly, thanks to the chardonnay grown, a small ocean of spumante is made here.
Indeed, sparkling wines were pioneered in the region in the early twentieth century by
Giulio Ferrari (not of car fame), and Ferrari is still one of Trentino-Alto Adige’s, indeed
one of Italy’s, top sparkling wine houses and the best known from the region.
                  THE QUICK SIP ON TRENTINO-ALTO ADIGE
           THE TOP TRENTINO-ALTO ADIGE white wines, including pinot grigios, kerners,
           traminers, Müller-Thurgaus, gewürztraminers, chardonnays, and sparkling wines, have
           precision, grip, and focus. The reds, including teroldego, lagrein, schiava, and cabernet
           sauvignon, are cool-climate, sleek reds with pure fruit flavors.
           ONE OF THE MOST STUNNINGLY beautiful wine regions in Europe, Trentino-Alto
           Adige, is bordered by the Swiss and Austrian Alps in the north; to the southeast is the
           Veneto, and to the southwest, Lombardy.
           THE REGION IS MADE UP of two distinctly different provinces. Trentino, to the south,
           is Italian in character, while Alto Adige, in the north, was once an area of Austria known
           as the Südtirol (South Tyrol). It is in Alto Adige that the very best wines are made.




Terraced vineyards near Trentino, the more southern, less mountainous, Italian-speaking part of the province Trentino-
Alto Adige. The more northern, mountainous part, Alto Adige, once belonged to Austria, and German is still commonly
                                                       spoken.

   The grape variety called traminer (or more accurately, traminer aromatico) is a
specialty here—especially in Alto Adige. (This is a clone of the ancient variety savagnin,
one of the “founder varieties”; see Drinking DNA, page 55.) Gorgeously floral, flavorful,
and yet light as a feather in body, traminer is a sister of the better-known grape
gewürztraminer (a rose-colored clone of savagnin). In the hands of a producer like Pojer e
Sandri, traminer is irresistible for its purity, liveliness, and brilliance. And speaking of
gewürztraminer—Alto Adige has brilliant, vibrant, decadent, and yet elegant
gewürztraminers that are as concentrated and vivid as the gewürztraminers of Alsace, only
zestier and sleeker. If you want to be blown away by a gewürztraminer (not from Alsace),
try the gewürztraminer called Nussbaumer, from the producer Cantina Tramin. And if
Müller-Thurgau has always seemed a little drab (which it generally is in Germany), you
must again taste Pojer e Sandri’s sensationally spicy, minerally version, as well as the
most famous Müller-Thurgau—Tiefenbrunner’s Feldmarschall von Fenner zu Fennberg
Müller-Thurgau, named after a disciple of Kaiser Wilhelm II. It comes from the vineyard
thought to have the highest elevation in Italy and tastes as fresh as water from an icy
mountain stream.
   But the northern Italian white grape that everyone seems to know—the grape that can
make wines that hit remarkable depths of mediocrity—is pinot grigio. Here in Trentino-
Alto Adige, pinot grigio saves its reputation. Somehow, in the glacial valleys of Alto
Adige in particular, the wine finds its groove as a delicate, exquisite white of impeccable
purity. The best example is Tenutae Lageder’s Porer pinot grigio, an intense, cold-weather,
utterly precise white wine made from biodynamically farmed grapes.
   If you drink adventurously, you’ll find Trentino-Alto Adige’s indigenous reds to be
captivating. One of the specialties of Trentino, in particular, is the brooding, super-spicy,
tannic wine teroldego, a grape that grows best in the gravelly, glacial soil of the Rotaliano
plain. Another Trentino specialty, schiava—from schiavo, “slave”—is turned into light,
spicy wines with a slight bitter-almond character. In Alto Adige, schiava is often called
vernatsch. Then there’s lagrein—dark, sharp, bitter, robust. These grapes, along with
Friuli’s tazzelenghe and schioppettino, make up a group of lean, sleek, bitter-edged, crisp,
cold-climate Italian reds that have no parallel anywhere else in the world.




           Enthusiasm is a must. Bubbles hit the ceiling of the cellar at Ferrari in Trentino-Alto Adige.

   Finally, Trentino-Alto Adige is known for a luscious, amber-colored, silky dessert wine
—vino santo (“holy wine;” probably a reference to its historic use as part of the Mass).
Not the same as Tuscany’s vin santo, which is generally made from trebbiano Toscano
and/or malvasia bianca lunga grapes, Trentino-Alto Adige’s vino santo is a specialty of the
Valle dei Laghi, near the northern end of Lake Garda, and also of the hills west of Trento,
where it is made by leaving native nosiola grapes on trays to dry for several months,
before fermenting them and aging them in barrels for two to three years. The name nosiola
most likely derives from nocciola, Italian for “hazelnut,” and a reference to the slightly
nutty aroma and flavor of the wine.
                                       LOMBARDY

The north-central region of Lombardy—Lombardia in Italian—is Italy’s most populous
region and the country’s leading industrial zone. Nowhere is the region’s commercial flair
more evident than in Milan, Lombardy’s most important city and Italy’s fast-paced capital
of fashion and finance. With business so preeminent, there hardly seems room for a wine
industry. But there is one; this is Italy, after all.
    Unlike Piedmont or Tuscany, Lombardy is not associated with a single grape variety,
but rather with dozens of them, as well as with several styles of wine, including the well-
known sparkling wine Franciacorta. Wines in this region, including a number of DOCGs,
are made in three principal areas located along the region’s borders. In the north, just a
short drive from Switzerland, is Valtellina; in the southwest corner, near Emilia-Romagna,
is Oltrepò Pavese; and in the far east, near the Veneto, is the most important and famous of
all three areas: the aforementioned Franciacorta, a DOCG. The name Franciacorta is said
to derive from the region’s towns—curtes in dialect—which were exempt—francae—
from taxes during the Middle Ages.
   Although sparkling wine is made in virtually every region of northern Italy,
Lombardy’s Franciacorta is the country’s leading area for sophisticated, dry sparkling
wines made by the traditional (Champagne) method. At their best, these are austerely
elegant sparklers with a fine, creamy mousse of bubbles.
   Historically a fairly bucolic place, and home to many convents and monasteries,
Franciacorta became Italy’s premier sparkling wine zone in the 1970s largely because of
the pioneering success of the producer Berlucchi. Today, a number of prestigious sparkling
wine firms are located there, including Bellavista (try their elegant Gran Cuvée Pas
Operé), Ca’ del Bosco, and Cavalleri. As is true in Champagne, Franciacorta’s sparkling
wines are made from chardonnay and pinot noir (called pinot nero locally), although pinot
blanc (pinot bianco) is also allowed. To distinguish them from spumantes that are made by
the Charmat method (such as Asti), Franciacorta sparklers are labeled metodo tradizionale
or metodo classico—synonyms for the traditional (Champagne) method (although, of
course, their higher price automatically puts them in a different league).

                         THE QUICK SIP ON LOMBARDY
         LOMBARDY (and its capital, Milan) are best known for industry and fashion, although
         some serious wines—especially sparklers—are made.
         FRANCIACORTA—Italy’s most prestigious traditional-method sparkling wine—is made
         here.
         THE STILL WINES OF THE REGION—both white and red—are made from a great
         diversity of grape varieties.
                             VIN BRULÉ AND PANETTONE
 On cold December mornings, there is nothing better than butter-slathered, toasted panettone, the large,
 cylindrical, Italian bread that is studded with candied fruits and raisins. With its church-dome-like,
 rounded top, panettone is traditional at Christmastime (and, come December, can be found in gourmet
 stores globally). Panettone is thought to have been created in Milan, in Lombardy, in the sixteenth
 century. The renowned bread is, in fact, now protected by a DOC for traditional Italian food products.
    Next door, in the Piedmont region of Italy, the bread is served in the late afternoon (or on Christmas
 Eve) with vin brulè (local dialect for “burnt wine”). Akin to English mulled wine, vin brulè is spiced and
 lightly sweetened wine, served steaming hot. To make it, the Italians combine a bottle of barbera or
 nebbiolo d’Alba with ¼ cup sugar, 2 cinnamon sticks, 4 pieces star anise, 2 cloves, several white
 peppercorns, and a couple of bay leaves. The mixture is heated almost to boiling, then put on very low
 heat and allowed to simmer for 30 minutes—whereupon it is drunk from mugs, with toasted panettone on
 the side.


   Franciacortas are made as nonvintage wines as well as vintage-dated (known as
Franciacorta millesimato). Rosé Franciacortas are also made, as well as a special category
called Satèn (the word was chosen for its similarity to the English word satin). Satèn are
sparklers with less carbon dioxide, and thus are slightly softer and less bubbly than
traditional sparkling wines. Finally, like Champagne, Franciacorta sparklers spend quite a
long time on the yeast lees—from 18 months for Franciacorta non-vintage to 60 months
for Franciacorta Riserva.
   In the same general area as Franciacorta, but farther east, near Lake Garda, is the small
region of Lugana, where the dry white wine based on trebbiano di Lugana, considered one
of the most tasty, aromatic types of trebbiano, is made. Although most trebbiano-based
wines are innocuous, Lugana—especially Lugana Superiore—can be nicely refreshing.
Some of its appeal may be related to the fact that it’s the wine usually served with the
region’s other specialty: fresh trout from the impressive Lake Garda.
   The Oltrepò Pavese, known as the land of castles for the thirty-eight medieval
fortresses that still stand imposingly across the landscape, is just a half hour’s drive from
Milan, but this is where the major share of Lombardian wine is made. The large (33,000
acres/13,400 hectares), hilly area is south of northern Italy’s important Po River, hence the
word Oltrepò (“on the other side of the Po”). Most of the wine here is of quaffing quality
or just slightly better, based on a huge number of grape varieties. The reds, for example,
are usually the product of barbera, cabernet sauvignon, pinot noir, and/or Croatina, a
simple, indigenous red. The humble whites are based on riesling italico (also known as
welschriesling, a grape also grown in Austria and eastern Europe and not the same as true
riesling), cortese, chardonnay, moscato, malvasia, and/or pinot grigio. Quite a bit of easy-
drinking, well-priced spumante also comes from here, as well as a relatively new, higher-
priced category of sparklers called Cruasé. A Cruasé is always a rosé made by the
traditional method (secondary fermentation in the bottle) predominantly (85 percent) from
pinot noir. Like Franciacorta, Cruasé is a DOCG. The name comes from crua—a worthy
piece of ground—and rosé.
 The town of Cinqueterre in Liguria, the coast of which is known as the Italian Riviera. The vineyards of Cinqueterre
                        (literally “Five Lands”) are located alongside five fishing villages.

   Lombardy’s third wine-producing area is the Valtellina, in the far north, on the
precipitous, cold yet sunny foothills of the Alps. Vineyards here are on slopes so steep
they must be terraced, and in some cases, as in Germany’s Mosel region, harvested grapes
are relayed down the mountainside in buckets attached to cables. This is the most northern
wine-growing region in the world for nebbiolo. Regular Valtellina is a simple, rough-
edged, lean red made principally from that grape. A notch higher in quality is Valtellina
Superiore, made from 90 percent nebbiolo and aged at least two years (compared to
regular Valtellina’s one). There are five sub-districts where Valtellina Superiore can be
made: Grumello, Sassella, Inferno, Maroggia, and Valgella. Of the five, Inferno is where
the tastiest and the biggest-bodied wines are made. The name Inferno, “hell” in Italian,
refers to the summer sun, which beats down on the terraced mountainside vineyards,
ripening the grapes.
   And finally, there is Valtellina Sforzato, Lombardy’s version of amarone. To make it,
the best clusters of nebbiolo are harvested, then hung to dry for approximately four
months in well-ventilated cellars. By the end of January, the grapes have lost 40 percent of
their weight and the juices inside have become quite concentrated. After the grapes are
fermented, the wine, inky and intense, is aged for two years before release.
                                      LIGURIA

Known as the Italian Riviera, Liguria is the crescent-shaped region arcing from the French
border down to Tuscany. Virtually in the center is Genoa, Liguria’s capital and one of
Italy’s most historic and busiest ports. The steeply terraced vineyards, perched on the
ridges of the Apennine mountain range, descend right to the Ligurian Sea. (Astoundingly,
some of the vineyards can be reached only by boat.) So little land is available for these
mountain-clinging vineyards that the production of Ligurian wine is necessarily
minuscule. And the steep incline means that vineyards can be farmed only slowly and
painstakingly by hand. Traditionally, much of the wine here was little more than a basic
commodity, meant for washing down the local cuisine. (Pesto and olive oil, both Ligurian
specialties, are especially famous.) But today, a new commitment to quality has taken
hold.
   Among Liguria’s numerous DOCs are several types of easy-drinking wines that are
important in the region. To Genoa’s east is the wine known as Cinqueterre, which
translates as “five lands” (so-called because the wine is made near five fishing villages).
Cinqueterre, often a simple, somewhat neutral-tasting but nonetheless popular white, is
made from bosco and albarola, two fairly innocuous varieties, plus vermentino, which has
more character. Indeed, the best producers use as much vermentino as possible, making a
wine that’s crisp, lively, and great with the fresh fish caught in the villages where the
grapes are grown. A sweet version—Cinqueterre Sciacchetrà—is made from grapes left in
the sun to dry and concentrate. Delicious but nearly impossible to find on the export
market, it’s a must-try if you are in Liguria.
   Here, east of Genoa, in the DOC known as Riviera Ligure di Ponente, you’ll also find
another rare local specialty—the white grape pigato (the name means “spotted,” from the
mottled appearance of the berries). At its best, pigato can make a lithe, minerally, bold
white that’s terrific with pesto.
   West of Genoa, ormeasco, vermentino, and Dolceacqua are made. Ormeasco is
Liguria’s name for dolcetto; it is turned into fruity, quaffing reds. Vermentino grapes were
probably brought to Italy from Spain, via Corsica, in the fourteenth century. The variety is
the source of the dry, floral, somewhat resinous white wine also known as vermentino, a
classic with Ligurian fish soups. Dolceacqua, sometimes known by its more formal name,
rossese di Dolceacqua, comes from rossese, the best red grape of the Italian Riviera.
Reportedly a favorite of Napoléon, this wine is commonly used as an ingredient in one of
the specialties of the region, rabbit braised with olives.
                           THE QUICK SIP ON LIGURIA
         A MOUNTAINOUS REGION cantilevered over the Ligurian Sea, in the Mediterranean,
         Liguria is better known for dramatic landscapes than stellar wine.
         AMONG THE TOP WINES in the region, the best known is Cinqueterre, a light-bodied,
         fresh wine from grapes grown on terraced hillsides overlooking the sea.
         THE TWO MAIN GRAPE VARIETIES in the region are the white grape vermentino and
         the red rossese.

   Estates in Liguria are small, many of them just local family operations, and often the
smaller the property, the more interesting the wine. It’s impossible to recommend
producers under these circumstances and, in any case, the number of Ligurian wines
exported is, as already mentioned, tiny. When in Liguria, the best strategy is an old
European one: Find a good chef and ask what he or she drinks.
                            EMILIA-ROMAGNA

“Ask an Italian where to eat only one meal in Italy and, after recommending his mother’s
house, it is more than likely he will send you to the region of Emilia-Romagna.” With this
declaration, Lynne Rosetto Kasper opens her authoritative cookbook The Splendid Table,
and Kasper is right. Emilia-Romagna is Italy’s ultimate food region and a place so
consumed by its passion for gastronomy that even the name of its capital, Bologna, is
telling: Bologna means “the fat one.” Here in the land that gives the world such serious
delicacies as Parmigiano-Reggiano, balsamic vinegar, and prosciutto di Parma, wine is,
well, playful might be the best word. There are no wines of renown, nothing on a par with
Chianti Classico, brunello di Montalcino, Barolo, or Barbaresco. What there is, however,
is a seemingly endless sea of fizzy lambrusco. In many countries, in fact, lambrusco is
among the top five imported Italian wines.
                                         BALSAMIC VINEGAR
 Wine’s “other self” is vinegar. And one of the best vinegars in the world is Italy’s balsamic vinegar. (Its
 only competitor is Spain’s Gran Reserva Sherry vinegar.) Both are unlike everything else called vinegar.
    Standard vinegar (the word comes from the French vin aigre, sour wine) is created when bacteria
 convert the alcohol in a fermented liquid into acetic acid. The process is quick; the final liquid is blunt and
 sharp. Traditional balsamic vinegar, on the other hand, is an exquisitely mellow, deeply concentrated,
 syruplike liquid, sweet enough to drink on its own. In Italy it’s often sipped from a small glass like a
 dessert wine. The adjective traditional is critical. There are countless inexpensive supermarket “balsamic
 vinegars” that are just ordinary red wine vinegar that has been sweetened and colored with caramel.
 They could come from Kansas.
     Real balsamic vinegar is made only in Emilia-Romagna, just north of Tuscany, around the towns of
 Modena and Reggio. It’s labeled aceto balsamico tradizionale di Modena or di Reggio, and recognizing
 its unique origin and authenticity, the EU and the Italian government grant it a DOP, Denomination of
 Protected Origin, equivalent to DOC status for wines. Price is always a tip-off: A small, 3-ounce (90-
 milliliter) vial of balsamico tradizionale can be three to five times the cost of a moderately expensive
 bottle of wine. The price reflects the painstaking, artisanal process by which traditional balsamic vinegar
 is made. First, the unfermented must of crushed grapes (usually trebbiano Modenese, but three others
 are also allowed) is boiled down to a sweet syrup, which then ferments and turns to vinegar. To
 condense the vinegar even more, the rich liquid is then aged a minimum of twelve years (it may be even
 decades) in a series of progressively smaller barrels made from different woods—oak, chestnut, cherry,
 linden, mulberry, juniper, ash, and so forth. As the water component of the liquid evaporates through the
 grain in the wood, the remaining liquid grows ever more dense and lush. Meanwhile, each wood imparts
 a different nuance to the final flavor of the vinegar. Although handcrafted, long-aged vinegars have been
 revered in Italian homes for centuries, the name balsamic was first used in the eighteenth century to refer
 to the “balmy” wood odors that would emanate from country farmhouses where the vinegar was patiently
 being made, usually in the attic.
    Traditional balsamic vinegar is used very selectively in Italy. It is dribbled (it’s too expensive to be poured) into
 a small amount of olive oil or butter and drizzled over cooked vegetables or fish. In the summer, it is dripped over
 fresh strawberries; in the fall, over fresh, thinly shaved, raw porcini mushrooms. For many Italians, however, the
 most godly of all culinary combinations is Parmigiano-Reggiano moistened with a few drops of an old, traditional
 balsamic vinegar.



                       THE QUICK SIP ON EMILIA-ROMAGNA
           IN A COUNTRY WHERE EVERY REGION is known for its food, Emilia-Romagna is
           considered the culinary apex. Food comes first here; wine’s sole purpose is to enhance
           whatever’s on the plate.
           SIMPLE, FROTHY (frizzante) lambrusco is what the region is known for, although more
           complex, artisanal versions of this wine are also now making their way onto the
           international scene.
           THE REGION, WHICH SPANS almost the entire width of Italy, is made up of two
           distinctly separate provinces. Emilia focuses mostly on frizzante wines, while Romagna
           focuses on still table wines.

   What makes Emilia-Romagna so culinarily rich is also what makes much of the wine
so comparatively poor. Running across the width of the region is the fertile Po River basin.
Readily available water and nutrients may be great for food crops, but for grapes it’s a
worrisome equation that usually results in high yields and thin, simple wines (although
there are some fantastic examples from small producers working with top grapes from the
best sites). The citizenry of Emilia-Romagna doesn’t seem to mind. Go into any good
restaurant, and rivers of lambrusco are being gulped down with pride.
   As its name suggests, Emilia-Romagna is actually two regions. Emilia, to the west of
Bologna, is the definitive home of lambrusco, and today also makes still wines, many of
which are based on international varieties like sauvignon blanc, chardonnay, and cabernet
sauvignon. In Romagna, to the east, most red wines are still, dry, and based on sangiovese.
Romagna’s leading white wine, albana di Romagna, is a fairly characterless white,
although it does have the major claim to fame of being (illogically) the first Italian white
wine granted DOCG status.
   But above all, this is the land of lambrusco. Not surprisingly, the fizzy, slightly bitter,
very fresh, and definitively purple wine tastes quite good with the region’s hearty
sausages, cured meats, and rich, meat-sauced pastas. Moreover, the people of Emilia-
Romagna insist that the light, frothy, fairly high-acid wine is the perfect aid to digestion in
a region that lives for its stomach.
   Sadly, the only lambrusco most wine drinkers know is the highly commercial, slightly
sweet stuff made by co-ops (and sometimes doctored into white and pink versions).
Indeed, Riunite Lambrusco, made by the giant Riunite Co-op and introduced to America
in 1967 was a huge success. By 1976, Riunite became America’s number-one selling
imported wine brand—a position it held, remarkably enough, for the next twenty-six
years.
   The top versions of lambrusco, however, are not sweet, but rather, dry and savory.
Either way, all lambrusco wines are made from the grape variety also known as
lambrusco. But here the going gets rough. There are at least thirteen different varieties
(plus dozens of clones) with the word lambrusco (or lambrusca) in the name. In Emilia-
Romagna, these different lambrusco varieties exist in close proximity—sometimes in the
next village. The main three lambrusco varieties are lambrusco di Sorbara (with floral
fresh flavors), lambrusco grasparossa (more intense wines with tannic grip), and
lambrusco salamino (so named because the long, cylindrical clusters look like small
salamis).
   As noted, lambrusco is usually what the Italians call frizzante, slightly fizzy, not quite
sparkling enough to be considered spumante. Generally speaking, most lambrusco gets its
bubbles by being fermented in pressurized tanks, not by the traditional (Champagne)
method. Top examples, however, do use the traditional method of second fermentation in
each bottle. Because of its frothy exuberance, lambrusco definitely tastes best when it is
young, soon after its release.
Hard work is evident everywhere in Emilia-Romagna, as the hands of a winemaker attest. In addition to wine, the region
is famous for many artisanal food products, including aceto balsamico di Modena, prosciutto di Parma, and Parmigiano-
                                                   Reggiano cheese.

   There was a time, not long ago, when the zesty, artisanal lambruscos that any wine
lover would prefer were available only in Emilia itself, and even then only in the four
distinct zones that specialized in it. But today the picture has changed. A number of
fantastic small-production versions are easy to find, including Cleto Chiarli, Fattoria
Moretto, Fiorini, Francesco Vezzelli, Lini, and Tenuta Pederzana.
   As for the wines of Romagna, albana di Romagna can be a soft and pleasant, if
unremarkable, white. Most versions are dry, but in Romagna you will come across slightly
sweet versions as well as spumantes made from the albana grape. The most popular red
wine is sangiovese di Romagna, based on a clone of sangiovese, and usually considered
simple at best. With some searching, it is possible to find more compelling versions made
by small producers, including Fattoria Paradiso, Ferrucci, and Tenuta Zerbina.
                                       UMBRIA

Compared to its neighbor Tuscany, the small region of Umbria is a serene, bucolic,
understated sort of place. Here, smack in the center of Italy, the landscape is gentle and
rolling, and the sunlight is almost as arrestingly gossamer as it is in Tuscany. It seems
fitting that Saint Francis of Assisi, Umbria’s most beloved son (and the patron saint of
animals), lived here. Indeed, one of the most striking cathedrals in the region is the
Basilica di San Francesco d’Assisi.
   Umbria’s best-known wine is Orvieto which, today, can be a white or red wine.
Historically, however, Orvieto was a stylish, crisp, slightly peachy white wine produced
around the medieval hill town of the same name, in the southern part of the region.
Orvieto, the best versions of which can have real character, is made from trebbiano
(specifically the local clones of trebbiano known as procanico), along with grechetto,
verdello, drupeggio, and sometimes malvasia. A step up in quality from basic Orvietos are
the Orvieto Classicos, wines that come from the original, small, central Orvieto zone.
Although most Orvietos encountered today are dry, the wine was originally slightly sweet.
While production is now limited, some of the most fascinating Orvietos are semisweet
versions known as amabile or even sweeter still, dolce. Several large, important Tuscan
firms, such as Antinori, Ruffino, and Barone Ricasoli, make dry Orvieto, and there are a
number of very good, smaller Umbrian producers, including Barberani and Decugnano dei
Barbi.
   While the traditional white grapes of Umbria make delicious, every-night wines like
Orvieto, there are also several more ambitious white wines coming from the region. The
best known is Antinori’s Cervaro della Sala, a rich, almost Burgundy-like blend of
chardonnay and grechetto made at the family’s breathtakingly beautiful, old Umbrian
estate, Castello della Sala.
    As for red wine, the relatively new red Orvieto (the DOC is known as Orvietano Rosso)
takes the concept of blending to new heights, since some thirteen red varieties can be
included, notably aleatico, cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon, canaiolo, ciliegiolo, merlot,
montepulciano, pinot noir, sangiovese, and several others, which can come from anywhere
in the entire Orvieto zone. And just so that all bases are covered, the wine can also be
made up entirely of any one of these (except montepulciano), as a single-varietal version.
    Umbria’s historic top red wines, however, are mostly made in the hills that surround
Perugia. Two types in particular are considered among Umbria’s best: Torgiano rosso
riserva and sagrantino di Montefalco, both of which have DOCG status. Torgiano (from
Torre di Giano, “tower of Janus,” the Roman god of gates and the namesake of January) is
a tiny village where the wine Torgiano is primarily made from sangiovese and canaiolo (as
Chianti historically was). Three additional grapes are optional: trebbiano, montepulciano,
and ciliegiolo.
   The village and surrounding area are dominated by the family-run winery Lungarotti,
founded by Giorgio Lungarotti in the 1960s. Lungarotti, a stately man, was instrumental in
helping various wines in Umbria receive DOC and DOCG status, and the quality of his
wines served as an inspiration to other Umbrian winemakers. Lungarotti’s museo del vino
(“wine museum”), known as “MUVIT” in the village of Torgiano, houses one of the most
impressive personal collections of wine artifacts in Italy, and should not be missed by any
traveler. Equally impressive is Lungarotti’s Olive and Oil Museum, known as “MOO,”
also in the village. Lungarotti’s wines, especially the Torgiano rosso riserva called
Rubesco, can be stunning and long-lived.

                             THE QUICK SIP ON UMBRIA
         UMBRIA IS A LANDLOCKED REGION centrally located on the knee joint of the boot-
         shaped country.
         WHILE PRODUCTION IS LIMITED compared to that of its neighbor Tuscany, Umbria
         produces the well-known, crisp white wine Orvieto, as well as two DOCGs: Torgiano
         rosso riserva and sagrantino di Montefalco.
         THE MOST IMPORTANT GRAPES are the white grechetto, trebbiano, and verdello,
         and the red sangiovese and sagrantino.




                       A basket of priceless, freshly harvested black truffles in Umbria.
                                   THE EMPEROR’S WINE
 Falernian was the Château Pétrus of ancient Rome—so sought after that you practically had to be the
 emperor of Rome to get a taste. Made from grapes grown in just three vineyards on Monte Massico,
 north of Naples, falernian symbolized the height of luxury and sophistication (so much so that
 counterfeits sprung up everywhere). It is not clear what variety of grapes were used to make the now-
 extinct wine. Indeed, scientists are not sure whether falernian was a white or red wine, although some
 writings by Pliny the Elder, and Petronius’s play Satyricon, point to it being a white wine. The 121 B.C.
 vintage was so legendary that it was still being written about two hundred years after its release.

   Sagrantino di Montefalco wines are quite the opposite of Torgiano wines. While most
Torgiano reds have the medium weight and relative delicacy of Chianti Classicos,
sagrantino di Montefalcos are inky-purple powerhouses—big, bold, gripping wines that
have been compared to amarones. The wines are made from the indigenous sagrantino
grape, and although the majority of examples today are dry, sweet versions made from
dried grapes were far more common in the past. There aren’t many producers of
sagrantino di Montefalco; the top one is Adanti.
                                             ABRUZZI

With its ample sunshine, dry climate, hilly terrain, coastal breezes off the Adriatic Sea,
and high altitude (three-fourths of the vineyards are more than 2,000 feet/610 meters
above sea level), Abruzzi appears to be tailor-made for vineyards. Indeed, this region in
central Italy, with its nearly 80,000 acres (32,000 hectares) of vineyards, is one of the most
productive in the country.
   Alas, more than three-fourths of all the wine in the Abruzzi region is produced by large
cooperative wineries, and a majority of that is made by the four co-ops that dominate
production: Cantina Tollo, Casal Thaulero, Casal Bordino, and Citra. These co-ops make
oceans of wine labeled Abruzzi, but they also make oceans of bulk wine, some of it
blended into wines from more famous neighboring regions.

                             THE QUICK SIP ON ABRUZZI
         LOCATED IN CENTRAL ITALY, Abruzzi is a somewhat isolated region along the
         Adriatic Sea. To the west, it is cut off from Lazio (Latium) and its capital, Rome, by the
         Apennine Mountains.
         DESPITE VERY GOOD VITICULTURAL conditions, Abruzzi is best known for
         inexpensive wine, the vast majority of which is made by large cooperative wineries.
         THE MOST NOTABLE WINE OF ABRUZZI is the rustic red montepulciano d’Abruzzo,
         made from the montepulciano grape. An often overlooked, easy-drinking, light-red style
         of montepulciano d’Abruzzo—cerasuolo d’Abruzzo—can also be delicious (it looks like
         a rosé but has a bit more oomph).




                                   In Abruzzi, a grandmother picks grapes.

  The top wine here is montepulciano d’Abruzzo, made, as the name implies, from
montepulciano grapes. (Note that the name of these grapes is very easily confused with the
wine vino nobile de Montepulciano, which is made in Tuscany from sangiovese grapes.)
Montepulciano d’Abruzzo, which is made all over the region, is usually an appealingly
rustic wine, solidly built, with a soft texture and good, thick fruit flavors in the middle.
Among the best wines are those labeled montepulciano d’Abruzzo Colline Teramane, a
DOCG. Unfortunately, there’s also a lot of characterless red made when montepulciano is
grown at high yields. Let price be your guide.
   A specialty here—especially suited to summer—is montepulciano d’Abruzzo cerasuolo
(meaning “cherry red”). This fresh, tasty light red of montepulciano is best consumed cold
and young, when its fruitiness is highlighted.
   The best-known white wine of Abruzzi is trebbiano d’Abruzzo, which—with a handful
of notable exceptions—usually makes a bland, dry, inexpensive quaffer meant to
accompany the region’s many fish dishes. The grapes behind most trebbiano d’Abruzzo
were once thought to be poor-quality cousins of trebbiano Toscana, but it appears the
Abruzzi trebbiano is a separate grape variety entirely. These grapes were also once
thought to be the same as the neutral-tasting variety bombino bianco, but bombino, too, is
now thought to be its own variety. In many cases, both varieties are part of the field blend
that makes up the wine, so, in the end, the story behind trebbiano d’Abruzzo is not entirely
clear.
   What is clear, though, is that a tiny handful of small, artisanal producers in Abruzzi
tower above all others and make extraordinary examples of these often uneventful wines.
Working with small yields, and often in innovative ways, such producers have developed a
cult following among Italian wine connoisseurs. Chief among them is the wine estate
Valentini. The late Edoardo Valentini has been called the Angelo Gaja of Abruzzi.
                         THE SOUTHERN PENINSULA:
                            CAMPANIA, APULIA, BASILICATA, AND CALABRIA

When the ancient Greeks admiringly called Italy Oenotria, “the land of wine,” they were
referring specifically to the southern peninsula—the toe, heel, and ankle of the Italian
boot. In this rugged, sunny, mountainous land, they found scores of fascinating grape
varieties. To these they contributed some of their own, establishing an even richer
foundation of viticulture. By the time of the ancient Romans, the south was a treasure
trove of wines, including the wine the Romans esteemed most: falernian, a wine (reports
differ on whether it was white or red) produced on the slopes of Monte Massico, in
Campania.
   As in Greece itself, however, this auspicious beginning never evolved into the kind of
future it seemed to promise. Today, the four regions of the southern peninsula—Campania,
Apulia, Basilicata, and Calabria—make many easy-drinking wines, but comparatively few
high-quality, famous wines. Admittedly, these regions have historically been among Italy’s
poorest and most rural. The combination of poverty and a hot climate conducive to high
yields has meant that quantity rather than quality has been the driving force behind the
wines. Until recently, a lot of the wine here was not even bottled, but sold directly from
the cask to local customers toting their own jugs.




 A statue of the Roman emperor Augustus stands on the limestone cliffs of Capri off the coast of Naples in Campania.
         Enthralled by the island’s beauty, Augustus built temples, aqueducts, and private villas on the island.
            THE QUICK SIP ON THE SOUTHERN PENINSULA
         CAMPANIA, APULIA, BASILICATA, and Calabria, on Italy’s southern peninsula, form
         the toe, heel, and ankle of the Italian boot.
         THESE SUNNY, LAID-BACK southern regions boast stunning coasts and imposing
         volcanic mountain ranges, although they remain some of the poorest and most rural
         regions of Italy.
         MUCH OF THE WINE IN THESE REGIONS is simple and rustic, but there are also
         delicious and surprising wines from local varieties, including the white grapes fiano and
         greco di Tufo, and the red grapes aglianico and negroamaro.

    Still, the southern peninsula can’t be dismissed. Revolutions in quality have happened
elsewhere, and there’s at least some reason to believe one may happen here. Already,
stirrings in that direction have begun, and more and more delicious southern Italian wines,
especially from Campania and Apulia—many of them great values—are being exported.

CAMPANIA
Campania is certainly better known for the appealing cacophony of Naples, the beauty of
the Amalfi Coast, and the cerulean blue waters of Capri than it is for wine, even though
this is, along with Apulia, one of the two most exciting southern regions. While there were
only three main wineries in Campania in 1970, today more than a hundred exist.
Moreover, the number of grape varieties also tops one hundred, including three of the
south’s most impressive ancient grapes: the red aglianico and two whites—fiano and
greco. All three of these important varieties thrive in the volcanic soils of Avellino,
northeast of Mount Vesuvius, a still-active volcano that erupted violently in A.D. 79,
destroying the nearby city of Pompeii (the remains of the city are perfectly preserved).
   Preserving the three main grape varieties—often called the archaeological varieties—
has been the mission of one of the south’s most famous and important producers:
Mastroberardino, founded in 1878 and still family run. In the late 1990s, the family,
working with Italian archaeologists, developed a project to analyze the DNA from grape
seeds buried in the volcanic ash and then replant the slopes of Mount Vesuvius with
vineyards devoted to these ancient grape varieties, much as such vineyards might have
existed in antiquity.
   Aglianico, a red variety, is the basis for the south’s most famous red wine, the DOCG
known as Taurasi. Almost blackish in color and with fascinating bitter chocolate, leather,
and tar aromas and flavors, Taurasi is also one of the only wines in the south noted for its
capacity to age. Mastroberardino’s sensational Taurasi, called Historia, is a dark,
foreboding wine with delicious severity.
   Aglianico aside, some of the most fascinating of Campania’s top wines today are white.
Their distinctiveness and quality result not only from the region’s volcanic soils, but also
from its hilly geography, which allows white varieties to be planted at higher, cooler
elevations, preserving acidity in the grapes. For example, the greco di Tufos made by both
Feudi di San Gregorio and Mastroberardino are bursting with freshness and are as cooling
as homemade limeade. Mastroberardino’s in particular (called Nova Serra) is a ballet
dancer of a white—poised to spring into action, with lots of energy wrapped around a taut
core.
   Besides greco and the somewhat softer, less dramatic fiano, Campania is known for
falanghina and coda di volpe. A mellow white wine with a hint of spice and bitter orange
peel, falanghina is traditionally paired with seafood or buffalo mozzarella pizza, both local
dishes. Coda di volpe (literally, “tail of the fox,” a reference to the variety’s elongated
grape clusters, which can look like the bushy tails of foxes) was once used primarily as a
blending grape, but today is also used alone to make a fruity, spicy wine.
                                     LACRYMA CHRISTI
 Made primarily from the white grapes coda di volpe and verdeca and the red grapes piedirosso and
 aglianico, grown on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, Lacryma Christi—“Tears of Christ”—is one of
 Campania’s most recognized, simple, easy-drinking wines (red, white, and sparkling versions are all
 made). There are several stories behind the name. One says that as Jesus Christ ascended to heaven,
 he looked down and saw the Bay of Naples, and it was so beautiful that he cried. His tears landed on the
 slopes of Mount Vesuvius, where vines miraculously sprang up. Another story suggests that when Lucifer
 fell from heaven, Christ was sad and cried tears that landed on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, again
 producing the miraculous vines. A third, far less miraculous, more pragmatic story recounts that local
 monks, lacking modern filtering equipment, passed the wine through canvas, causing it to fall in drops,
 like tears.


APULIA
A long, flat, sun-drenched, fertile strip of land across the Adriatic Sea from Greece, Apulia
stretches from the spur of the Italian boot to its heel. For the past half decade, this region
has produced more Italian wine than any other. Indeed, Apulia is so well suited to
agriculture that it also produces more olive oil than any other region (almost half of Italy’s
total production), and some of those olive trees are more than one thousand years old.
  Much of the wine, alas, is basic, cheap table wine. Nonetheless, there are some very
good, everyday red wines, the sort that would make perfect bargain-priced house reds.
(With recent outside investments by well-known Italian producers, such as Tuscany’s
Antinori family, the quality of the basic table wines is rising.)
    The leading grape varieties are negroamaro (based on the Latin name for black, negro,
and probably on the Italian word for bitter, amaro, although some historians think amaro
is derived from another reference to black, the Greek maru), malvasia nera di Brindisi,
nero di Troia, and primitivo. All can be rustic and tasty. Negroamaro is the primary grape
in Apulia’s hot, arid, and most famous wine district, the Salento peninsula. Here it is made
into the wine Salice Salentino, often one of the most popular low-priced wines on Italian
restaurant wine lists, especially the dependably tasty Salice Salentino made by Taurino.
    Uva di Troia (also known as nero di Troia) is the source of the robust red DOCG wine
Castel del Monte Nero di Troia Riserva. (It is indigenous to Apulia, to the areas near the
village of Troia, and has nothing to do with the Greek city of Troy.)
    As for primitivo, it is (along with California’s zinfandel) the same as the Croatian grape
crljenak kaštelanski—historically known as tribidrag—and was brought from its home on
the Dalmatian coast of Croatia to southern Italy. In Apulia, primitivo is made into dry and
sweet wines. The dry is not unlike a light-bodied American zinfandel. The sweet primitivo
is the DOCG known as primitivo di Manduria dolce naturale, a rare, sweet red (8 percent
residual sugar) that can be made only in the best vintages and must be made entirely from
primitivo grapes allowed to raisinate on the vine.
   Finally, as a fascinating aside, because of Apulia’s fertility and strategic location,
dozens of groups and empires have ruled it over the past two thousand years. But the lack
of ground water has been a constant limiting factor to the region’s growth. That said, as of
the seventeenth century, ingenious dwellings called trulli were constructed. Mortarless
limestone huts with conical roofs, the trulli were usually built directly atop cisterns dug
into the bedrock. They are still found today near the vineyards of the Itria Valley.




 Trulli, the typical, conical-topped dwellings of Apulia. Made from limestone bricks stacked without mortar, the trulli
were sometimes built over cisterns dug into the bedrock below. They were sometimes used as storehouses, but they also
                                    served as shelters for field and vineyard workers.


BASILICATA
Basilicata is the most mountainous region of southern Italy—almost half of the region is
made up of the foothills and mountain peaks of the Apennines, one of the largest mountain
ranges in Italy. Although the region has small coasts on the Ionian and Tyrrhenian Seas, it
is, for the most part, landlocked and isolated. Overall, the region is extremely poor (it was
completely deforested by the Romans two thousand years ago). Less than 5 percent of the
wine here is DOC or DOCG. There is but one very important wine, the red DOCG known
as aglianico del Vulture, named after Mount Vulture, an extinct local volcano on whose
slopes the best grapes grow.
   The aglianico grape variety is indigenous to southern Italy (there is no DNA evidence
suggesting it is related to any Greek grape brought from Greece). The most highly
regarded producers of aglianico del Vulture are Donato d’Angelo, Terre Degli Svevi, and
Bisceglia (whose aglianico del Vulture, called Gudarrà, is an amazingly distinctive wine
with the earthiness of dried porcinis).
                              HOW OLD IS YOUR HOUSE?
 In Basilicata, in the ancient city of Matera, the streets stacked against the hillsides are lined with cave
 dwellings, called sassi, that were part of a prehistoric troglodyte settlement, created by some of the first
 people to settle in Italy nine thousand years ago. The original cave dwellers ingeniously designed the
 caves to capture and direct the natural water channels in the rock, as water is scarce on the
 mountainside. These cave homes have been inhabited since they were constructed, although many
 people were forced out of these homes and into more modern houses by the Italian government in the
 1950s (the caves were once rife with malaria). Today, you can have a drink at a café or rent a room for a
 night at a high-end hotel in a nine-thousand-year-old sasso.


CALABRIA
The toe of Italy’s boot, Calabria, was a favorite place among ancient Greek adventurers.
The arid, mountainous terrain has meant that Calabria has remained an impoverished
region. While olive trees and orange orchards do well here, grape growing is a challenge.
Nonetheless, some good wines are made. The most important of these is Cirò, a medium-
bodied, grapey, spicy red made from the ancient variety gaglioppo. The top producer is
Librandi. (Legend has it that Cirò was offered to the winners of the ancient Greek
Olympics.)
    Just east of Calabria’s, and the country’s, southernmost point is the remote seaside town
of Bianco. This is the source of Calabria’s other notable wine, the white wine greco di
Bianco. A dessert wine made from partially dried greco grapes, it has a fascinating herbal,
citrus flavor.
                           SICILY AND SARDINIA

The Mediterranean’s two largest islands, Sicily and Sardinia, have been the prized
acquisitions of virtually every Mediterranean power in antiquity, from the Phoenicians,
Byzantines, and Arabs to the Romans and Catalans. The two islands epitomize the sunny
Mediterranean climate and share a long history of producing wines that range from simple
and delicious to stunning.

SICILY
In terms of volume of wine produced, Sicily is one of the top regions in Italy, and it’s also
Italy’s largest region—at 10,000 square miles (26,000 square kilometers), it is larger than
Tuscany, itself a fairly large region. Viticulture flourished here under the Greeks, and the
island’s wines soon became some of the most famous of the ancient world. By the time of
the Roman Empire, the sweet Sicilian wine known as mamertine was highly admired by
the ruling class and is said to have been the favorite wine of Julius Caesar.
   In no place is the Santa Trinità Mediterranea —“Mediterranean Holy Trinity”—of
wine, olive oil, and bread more evident than in Sicily. The island’s hilly terrain, poor soil,
and unfaltering sunlight are tailor-made for the production of all three Italian necessities.
Moreover, Sicily’s strategically located port cities have made the trading of all three
relatively easy, both today and in the past.
   For much of the twentieth century, Sicily suffered from the same wine mentality that
handicapped Apulia, Campania, Basilicata, and Calabria—namely that quantity mattered
more than quality. As in those regions, the yields in Sicilian vineyards were pushed to the
limit and winemaking was haphazard at best; Sicilian wine grew predictably worse.
Ironically, the island so famous for its wines in antiquity became, in the twentieth century,
infamous for ultra-cheap vino da tavola. In the 1970s and 1980s, the decline of the
reputation of Sicilian wines caused the top producers to launch a mini-revolution oriented
toward quality. Today, more fascinating wines—white as well as red—are coming out of
Sicily than ever before. The local grape variety grillo, for example, is made by top
producers like Tenuta Rapitalà into dry, racy whites that detonate on the palate with spicy,
peppery, exotic orange and herbal notes. Although, like grillo, the best of these local
Sicilian varieties are still not widely known, many of them may eventually rank with the
most distinctive and delicious wines produced in the entire country.
                                      The old, narrow streets of Sicily.


                 THE QUICK SIP ON SICILY AND SARDINIA
         THROUGHOUT THEIR HISTORY, Italy’s two largest islands have been conquered and
         claimed by numerous Mediterranean nations. Each of those countries left their stamp,
         creating what is today a richly diverse palette of foods and wines on each island.
         MULTIPLE STYLES OF white and red wine are made on the islands, from such varied
         grapes as riesling, carricante, and nero d’Avola (Sicily) to cannanou, girò, and
         vernaccia di Oristano (Sardinia).
         TWO OF THE MOST HAUNTINGLY delicious dessert wines in the world come from the
         tiny islands off Sicily’s coast—moscato passito di Pantelleria and malvasia delle Lipari.

    One of the areas generating excitement in Sicily today is Mt. Etna, a raging volcano
that continues to erupt regularly. (The last series of massive eruptions, in 2012, resulted in
spewing fountains of lava, some taller than the Eiffel Tower.) As improbable as it seems,
in the past two decades, dozens of winemakers—Italian and foreign—have planted
vineyards here, in the black lava soil on slopes that broach an astounding 45 degrees. (The
vintners acknowledge the danger from eruptions, but so far the lava flows have descended
on a side of the mountain not covered in vineyards.) Some of those vineyards lie at
elevations greater than 3,300 feet (1,000 meters) above sea level. The sun here—as you
might expect in Sicily—is bright. But what seem decidedly un-Sicilian are the cold
temperatures. Indeed, Mt. Etna’s chilly air and resulting late harvest (often as late as
November) make the area ideal for snappy whites such as riesling and carricante, a local
white grape that yields minerally, racy wines with resiny notes of fennel and citrusy notes
of bergamot. In this extreme terroir, many vineyards are planted alberello (“little tree” or
“bush”) style, which is to say, without expensive trellising which, in any case, would be
difficult to construct given the terrain. Graci’s Etna Bianco, primarily carricante, is a
fantastic example of a wine made from the variety. And the Mt. Etna white that must be
tasted for sheer exotic outrageousness is Frank Cornelissen’s MunJebel Bianco, a bold,
almost orange-colored wine that smells like orange-spiced tea and tastes of mangoes,
spices, ash, and minerals.




The Piazza IX Aprile in the ancient coastal town of Taormina on Sicily’s east coast. The square was named after April 9,
1860, when Mass in the nearby Taormina cathedral was interrupted to announce that Garibaldi had landed at Marsala
          (on the far side of the island) to begin a conquest that would ultimately make Sicily a part of Italy.

   Mt. Etna’s reds are not for the faint of heart. They are generally based on two grapes—
nerello Mascalese (which geneticists believe is a progency of sangiovese) and nerello
cappuccio (parentage unknown; the name means “black hood”).
   Mt. Etna reds are often very delicately colored (lighter even than pinot noir). But
beware; what awaits your palate is a massive onslaught of chalky, dusty dryness and the
sort of bitterness that oversteeped tea possesses. (I always feel as if someone has just
stuffed wet clay in my mouth.) As the Italians might say: You really need to drink them
with food.
The coastal village of Naxos, the most ancient of the Greek colonies on Sicily. It was founded in 735 B.C., by a group of
                       colonists from Chalcis (also spelled Chalkida) on Greece’s Euripus Strait.

   But Mt. Etna aside, Sicily generally makes good, concentrated reds based primarily on
the grape variety nero d’Avola (also called Calabrese), a high-quality variety that can
produce intensely black-colored wines of real depth, juiciness, and charm. Dozens of
estates now focus on this variety, and some produce wines of surprising complexity and
richness. Among the top producers: Feudo Principe di Butera, Tenuta Rapitalà, Abbazia
Santa Anastasia, Duca di Salaparuta, Planeta, Fatascià, and the large firm Regaleali, for
their nero d’Avola called Rosso del Conte.
    But as good as all of these dry wines are, I have to say that two of the most wickedly
delicious dessert wines in the world come from Sicily (actually, from two tiny islands off
its coast)—moscato passito di Pantelleria and malvasia delle Lipari.
   Moscato passito di Pantelleria is made just 37 miles (60 kilometers) off the coast of
Tunisia, on the tiny (9 miles/14 kilometers long), active volcanic island of Pantelleria, a
satellite island of Sicily and part of the same volcanic chain. (Pantelleria is currently
sinking slightly, as the cooling magma under it deflates and degasses itself.) The Arabs,
who ruled Pantelleria for four centuries (700 to 1123) and were the first to bring
grapevines here, called it Bint al-Riyāh (“the daughter of the winds”), a reference to the
fierce, hot north African winds that rage over the island. The grapes the Arabs brought
were zibibbo (from zabib, Arabic for “raisins”). Zibibbo is the local name for muscat of
Alexandria.
    Because of the ferocious winds, zibibbo on Pantelleria is trained low to the ground,
small and bonsai-like, in shallow basins dug into the volcanic soil so that the vines are not
ripped apart by the direct force of the winds. (A similar system is used on the windy Greek
island of Santorini.)
    In the sun-drenched vineyards of Pantelleria, zibibbo grapes have no trouble growing
fat with sugar and being turned into ripe, effusively aromatic moscato wine. This is known
simply as moscato di Pantelleria. Its more famous and complex sister—the syrupy,
sensational moscato passito di Pantelleria—requires more involved winemaking and is
made in minuscule quantities.
    To produce it, part of the moscato is harvested when ripe, pressed, and the juice set
aside, much like the grapes for the regular moscato di Pantelleria just mentioned. The
remaining moscato grapes are handled as they would be for a passito wine; that is, the
grapes are laid on mats and dried al fresco, in the sun for several weeks, until they’ve
shriveled into supersweet raisins. Next, the sugary juice from the raisins is blended into
the fresh moscato juice that was set aside, and the two are fermented together. Drinking
the exquisite, neon-orange, langorous wine that results—moscato passito di Pantelleria—
is tantamount to being on a roller coaster of luscious sensations. (Interestingly, Hungarian
Tokaji aszú is made in a similar manner, whereby hyperconcentrated grapes—in the case
of Hungary, the grapes are botrytized, not dried—are added to the juice of fresh grapes,
then the whole is fermented into a sweet wine.)
   The best moscatos passito di Pantelleria—both masterpieces of beauty—are Marco de
Bartoli’s Bukkuram (the name means “father of the vine”) and Donnafugata’s Ben Ryé
(the name means “son of the wind”).
   And then there is Lipari, a chain of volcanic islands off Sicily’s northeastern coast.
Lipari forms part of the volcanic archipelago that straddles the gap between two other
famous volcanoes—Mt. Vesuvius in Campania and Mt. Etna in Sicily. (The islands are
famous for being covered in obsidian, a hard, black, volcanic glass.) This is where
malvasia delle Lipari, Sicily’s other stunning passito dessert wine, is made from malvasia
di Lipari grapes (in the grape name, di replaces delle). Quantities of malvasia delle Lipari
are minuscule. There are only a few small producers—notably Carlo Hauner and Lantieri.
Both of their hauntingly orange-amber malvasia delle Lipari are so good, your mind hurts
from tasting them.
    Historically, one of Sicily’s most famous wines was Marsala, a sweet fortified wine
that, despite numerous cheap supermarket examples, can be extremely delicious when
made by a first-rate producer. Marsala is made principally from grillo, catarratto bianco,
and inzolia grapes, along with an occasional small amount of perricone, nero d’Avola,
and/or nerello Mascalese. The wine takes its name from the ancient port city of Marsala,
from which vineyards spread out on the plains and low hills of Sicily’s Trapani province,
in the far western part of the island.
    Although well-regarded wines have been made in this region from classical times,
Marsala as we know it today was “invented” in the 1770s by an Englishman, John
Woodhouse, who predicted that the sweet and fortified wine would be an immediate hit in
cold, rainy Britain, where the market for such warming wines as Port, cream Sherry, and
Madeira had already proven gargantuan. Woodhouse was right; almost immediately,
several large Marsala firms sprang up, and the fortunes of the city escalated. Over most of
the subsequent two centuries, however, the quality of Marsala dropped to the point where
it was relegated more to cooking than to collecting. In the 1980s, Marsala production
experienced a small but significant turnaround, and today, high-quality Marsalas are again
being made, though in minuscule amounts.
   Marsala comes in three colors—oro (“golden”), ambra (“amber’), and rubino (“ruby”).
Rubino is extremely rare. Each type can be made at three levels of sweetness: fairly dry
(secco, 4 percent residual sugar), noticeably sweet (semisecco, 4 to 10 percent residual
sugar), and very sweet (dolce, over 10 percent residual sugar). Each is fortified to 17 or 18
percent alcohol. Within each category, there is a hierarchy based on how long the wine is
aged in oak (and sometimes in cherry wood). Fine Marsala is aged one year; superiore is
aged two years; superiore riserva is aged four years; vergine is aged five years; and the
oldest, vergine stravecchio, is aged ten years.
    The multiple and intricate ways in which Marsala is made could easily take up a book
in itself, since different production techniques are used depending on the type of Marsala
being made. That said, many of the best versions are made by a method similar to the
solera process of fractional blending used for Sherry (see page 458). In that process,
younger wines are progressively blended with older wines, using a complex hierarchy of
barrels. The least aged (and least expensive) Marsalas are those that sell the best, but the
most stunning Marsalas are the vergines and vergine stravecchios, which in finesse and
richness equal the best tawny Ports and oloroso Sherries. The single producer widely
recognized for making a Marsala in a league of its own is Marco de Bartoli, whose
Marsala is called Vecchio Samperi.

SARDINIA
Compared to the friendly, welcoming aura of Sicily’s vineyards, vegetable markets, cities,
hill towns, and fishing villages, Sardinia (Sardegna in Italian) is more remote. At 125
miles (200 kilometers) from the Italian mainland, the island is far more isolated, and its
people more insular. Sardo, the local language, is a curious mix of Italian, Spanish,
Basque, and Arabic. And despite the island’s extensive coastline, the local inhabitants are
far more likely to be descended from a long line of shepherds than from fishermen.
Grazing animals is still a dominant activity on this rugged, sparse, mountainous island.
Sardinians are known for their healthful lifestyle and Mediterranean diet. Indeed,
Sardinia’s Nuoro province is thought to have more people over the age of one hundred
than anywhere else in the world.
                  Carignano grapes, undergoing veraison, at Agricola Punica in Sardinia.

   Like Sicily, Sardinia was ruled by a succession of Mediterranean peoples, although the
Spanish had more influence here than they did in Sicily. As a result, several of the grape
varieties grown in Sardinia today are thought to be Spanish in origin, including cannonau
(the same as Spain’s garnacha), carignano (cariñena or carignan), and the ancient variety
girò. Planted all over the island, cannonau is Sardinia’s most important red grape.
   Modern cannonau is a bold, dry, spicy red that has chaparral and dried herb flavors
suggested by the parched island itself. Terrific on its own, it’s also sometimes blended.
Sella & Mosca’s Tanca Farra—a blend of 50 percent cannonau and 50 percent cabernet
sauvignon, is stellar. (The name Tanca Farra means “iron earth” in Sardinian dialect.) As
for girò, it is planted mostly near Sardinia’s major city Cagliari, and makes an interesting
Portlike wine, though not a lot is produced. And carignano, grown in what was once
known as Sulcis, in the far south of the island, makes a decent red that often has an
appealing dirty, earthy flavor.
   Two white wines are very much worth knowing about. First is the unusual vernaccia di
Oristano, a fascinating, bone-dry, bitter-almond-like white, made in a way that allows the
wine to partially oxidize so that it tastes rather like a simple Sherry. (Confusingly,
Sardinia’s vernaccia is not the same grape as the vernaccia of Tuscany’s vernaccia di San
Gimignano.) The other white is vermentino—a terrific dry white that could be any Italian
wine lover’s nightly house wine. No other dry white wine has a flavor that quite compares
to vermentino. It’s a simple wine to be sure. But the aromas and flavors mirror the dry,
windswept island itself, and are evocative of wind-whipped dry brush and resinous herbs
like wild rosemary, sage, and dried lavender. Add a platter of grilled Mediterranean fish
dressed in pungent, fresh, extra virgin olive oil, and you’re all set. Vermentino is often
labeled simply vermentino di Sardegna (try the excellent one from the producer Argiolas),
although those made in the area known as Gallura, in the far northern part of the island,
near the neighboring island of Corsica, are labeled vermentino di Gallura.
SLOVENIA
SLOVENIA RANKS 27TH AMONG WINE PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE SLOVENIANS
DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 11 GALLONS (43 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

While not as well known as its neighbors—Austria, Hungary, Croatia, and the Italian
province of Friuli-Venezia Giulia—Slovenia has much in common with all of them,
including similarities of climate, geography, and history and, importantly, the ability to
produce phenomenal wines. This small country (half the size of Switzerland) currently
ranks twenty-seventh in wine production volume worldwide, yet it’s on track to become
one of those old wine regions that emerges brilliantly new again.
   Like many former Communist countries in Central Europe, Slovenia suffered under the
political upheaval of the twentieth century. The country’s fine wine industry—once
centered around carefully cultivated vineyards and prestigious, historic wineries—was
dismantled and neglected until little was left except cooperatives that produced cheap,
low-quality wine in bulk. But like Hungary, Croatia, and the Republic of Georgia,
Slovenia emerged from Communist rule with a fierce rededication to making the
renowned wines of its past.




Northern Slovenian villages border Austria and the Alps. The country, at the same latitude as Piedmont, has a mixture of
climates—from an alpine climate in the north to a more Mediterranean climate in the south near Slovenia’s border with
                                                         Italy.

   The first accounts of winemaking in Slovenia date from 500 B.C. to 400 B.C., when
Celtic and Illyrian tribes here began growing grapes and making wine. From the fall of the
Roman Empire, around A.D. 600, until the end of the Austro-Hungarian Empire (1918),
Slovenian vineyards were mainly cultivated by monks and, as was true in Burgundy, much
of the best vineyard land was under the control of monasteries. But the twentieth century
brought vast changes. When the Austro-Hungarian Empire was dissolved in the aftermath
of World War I, Slovenia declared independence and eventually became part of
Yugoslavia. After World War II, Yugoslavia became a socialist state, and was folded into
the so-called Eastern Bloc of the Soviet Union. Wine quality, which had taken a drastic dip
after World War I, never recovered as Communist regulations kept production inexpensive
and quality low. Revolutionary stirrings started in the 1980s, and in 1991 Slovenia gained
independence through the Ten Day War with Yugoslavia. It joined the European Union in
2004, and has been on a mission to improve wine quality ever since.
   Sometimes called “The Green Treasure of Europe” for its dense forests, Slovenia is the
third-most-forested country in Europe, with over half of the country covered in trees. The
country’s climate is similar to its neighbors’, with a Mediterranean influence near its
border with Italy, an alpine climate on the border with Austria, and a continental zone in
the middle of the country. Slovenia occupies the same band of latitude (40 to 46 degrees
North) as many top winegrowing regions around the world, including Piedmont,
Bordeaux, and Napa Valley, and faces similar weather challenges: spring frosts, summer
drought, and, as happens occasionally in Bordeaux, devastating hail. A complex network
of rivers runs across the plains and valleys of the country, supporting the vast forests and
ubiquitous fruit orchards. Grapevines here grow best on steep slopes above the rich and
arable soil created by these river networks.




    Vineyards on the limestone plateau of Kras, which extends over southwestern Slovenia and northeastern Italy.
                 HOW SLOVENIAN WINES ARE CLASSIFIED
 Slovenian wines are classified by the ZGP (Zašćiteno Geografsko Poreklo), a government organization
 that has adopted a system similar to the European Union’s. Basic table wine is labeled as Namizno, and
 the next step up, country wine, is called Deželno PGO. Fine wine dominates production in Slovenia—70
 percent of all wine produced is classified as either Kakovostno ZGP (quality wine) or the highest quality
 designation, Vrhunsko ZGP (premium quality). Over Slovenia’s long history of winemaking, however,
 unique traditional styles of wine have also developed within towns and communities. These are given the
 designation Posebno Tradicionalno Poimenovanje (PTP), and include the red wine known as teran
 (made from the grape refosco) from the Kras district of Primorska, and the pale red wine called cviček
 (made from red and white grapes including žametovka, blaufränkisch, and riesling) from the Dolenjska
 region of Posavje.

   Slovenia has just over 25,000 growers, each of whom cultivates, on average, less than 2
acres (0.8 hectares) of vineyard land. (There are no current statistics on the number of
brick-and-mortar wineries.) The country makes more white wine than red, and the range
of grape varieties is astounding. Dozens of varieties are grown, from furmint and
sauvignon blanc to cabernet sauvignon and blaufränkisch. Most of Slovenia’s 40,000 acres
(16,200 hectares) of vineyards fall into one of three regions: Primorska, Posavje, or
Podravje.
   Hugging the Italian border and the Adriatic coastline, Primorska has made the most
progress in the past two decades. Forty percent of all Slovenian wine is now made here
from a mix of native and international varieties, the most common of which are
chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, sivi pinot (pinot gris), rebula (ribolla gialla), merlot,
cabernet sauvignon, modri pinot (pinot noir), and refošk, also spelled refosko (refosco).
Primorska consists of four districts, each marked by distinct geography: the Vipava Valley,
Koper, Kras, and Goriška Brda. A few words on each follow.
    The stunningly beautiful Vipava Valley acts as a corridor between northern Italy and
Central Europe, and makes mostly white wines from the local varieties pinela and zelen.
The family-owned winery Batič is located here, and the wines they make are nothing short
of amazing. The family has strong philosophical and spiritual beliefs. They don’t make
wine when it is overcast because God can’t see the wine. No one in the family has gone to
viticultural or winemaking school, in order to keep their intuitions and actions “pure” and
profoundly connected to their natural environment. It may sound a bit out-there, but
Batič’s cloudy, orange-colored, bitter-fruity-salty wine called Zaria (a blend of pinela,
zelen, and rebula) is one of the most distinctive and unusual wines of Central Europe—a
profound commingling of orange zest, honeycomb, peach pits, sea salt, darjeeling tea,
minerals, earth, and marmalade.
                            Harvest in Goriška Brda, in the region of Primorska.


                          THE QUICK SIP ON SLOVENIA
         SLOVENIA is one of the most exciting “new” wine regions of the Old World.
         SLOVENIAN WINE (and culture) has been highly influenced by its neighbors—Italy,
         Austria, Hungary, and Croatia—and by its position as a gateway between Central
         Europe and the ports of Italy.
         SLOVENIA GROWS a huge variety of grapes: from furmint, sivi pinot (pinot gris), and
         rebula (ribolla gialla) to cabernet sauvignon, blaufränkisch, and refosko.

   Koper, part of which hugs the Adriatic coast, is the warmest wine region in Slovenia,
and produces white wines from refošk and malvazija (malvasia). The latter can be a real
beauty—with spicy, peachy aromas and a wonderful minerality (try the malvazija from
Vinakoper). The Kras region (also known as the Karst, or Carso in Italian), is a limestone
plateau extending across the border of southwestern Slovenia and northeastern Italy. Here,
the traditional wine is called teran, a dense, tannic, and acidic red wine made from refosco
grapes (the grapes are known as refošk or refosko in Slovenia). Local tradition calls for
teran makers to produce prosciutto (pršut), which is made by hanging it over the
fermenting vat of teran until it, too, takes on a deep red color.
    The fourth region, Goriška Brda (sometimes known simply as Brda, which means
hills), is Slovenia’s most acclaimed wine region. Essentially an extension of Italy’s Collio
DOC in Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Goriška Brda is best known for the white wine rebula, as
well as for cabernet sauvignon–merlot blends. The rebula is sometimes fermented and
aged on its skins in kvevri—large amphorae sealed closed for many months and buried
underground—creating a dark, almost neon orange wine not unlike the orange wines of
Georgia made in qvevri (spelled in that country with a q). The rebula-based orange wine
called Amphora from the Kabaj winery is a great example. Brda is successful with
numerous other grapes, too, including sauvignon blanc, sivi pinot, modri pinot, refošk, and
zeleni sauvignon (Friulano). Some of the best producers in Brda include Kabaj, Movia,
Edi Simčič, Marjan Simčič, and Kocijančič Zanut.




       Family dinner in Podravje. Slovenians, like their neighbors the Italians and Austrians, live for flavor.

   To the south and east of Primorska lies Posavje, the smallest of Slovenia’s winegrowing
regions. It is the only region in this white wine–dominated country to produce more red
wine than white. Alas, much of this is inexpensive bulk wine. Yet the district known as
Bela Krajina makes good modra frankinja (blaufränkisch) that is worth seeking out; and
Dolenjska is known for a popular style of crisp, pale red wine called cviček, a blend of
blaufränkisch and the local red žametovka with white grape varieties like riesling.
    The largest wine region in Slovenia is Podravje, located in the northeast corner of the
country and divided into seven districts. Simple white wines are produced here from laški
rizling (welschriesling) and šipon (furmint), and a small amount of high-quality wine is
made from renski rizling (riesling), chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, and sivi pinot. The best
regions are Radgona-Kapela, Ljutomer-Ormož, and Maribor. As an aside, Maribor is
home to the oldest living grapevine in the world. The vine (which was certified by
Guinness World Records in 2004) is the native red variety žametovka, and is more than
four hundred years old. Today, the vine produces less than a gallon of wine per year,
which is bottled in one hundred tiny bottles and given to important figures around the
world. Pope John Paul II and former United States President Bill Clinton both received
tiny bottles of Maribor’s miracle wine. Some of the best producers in Podravje are Marof,
Pullus, and Črnko.
                                     A winegrower in Kras.

   Finally, Slovenia’s rich cultural heritage has been influenced by its neighbors—Italy,
Austria, Hungary, and Croatia—and by its strategic position as a gateway between Central
Europe and the ports of Italy. Feasts and festivals take place throughout the year, the apex
being the Feasts of St. Martin, a week in November of eating, drinking, parades, and
dances throughout all of Slovenia to celebrate St. Martin, the patron saint who turned
water into wine.
                                                                                                     SPAIN

  RIOJA | RIBERA DEL DUERO | JEREZ: THE SHERRY REGION | PENEDÈS |
                       RÍAS BAIXAS | PRIORAT
 THE BASQUE REGION      | BIERZO | CALATAYUD AND CAMPO DE BORJA | CASTILLA-LA MANCHA |
                                    JUMILLA | RUEDA | TORO
SPAIN RANKS THIRD AMONG WINE PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE SPANISH DRINK
AN AVERAGE OF 6 GALLONS (24 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

When I began my career in wine, the first European country I explored was Spain (this
was in the early 1970s and most of my colleagues had headed straight for Bordeaux). Like
its wines, Spain itself, back then, was an enigma. Fiercely masculine, prideful, insular. As
far away from the happy ciao-ness of Italy and the joie de vivre of France as any country
could get. I remember going to my first bullfight, and at the end, when the bull was dead,
the matador sliced off the animal’s ear and threw it, bloody, into my lap. Spain was never
about emotional weakness. To this day, a sense of savagery and strength are the through-
lines in many Spanish red wines.




             Spain is a country of enormous history and tradition. Its former prowess is palpable.

      “In Spain, no matter if you make screwdrivers, at some point after you have
      saved a little money, the first thing you want to do is own a winery. It is very
      important to the Spanish soul.”
                                                       — YOLANDA GARCÍA VIADERO,
                                                            winemaker, Bodegas Valduero
   When talking about making wine, Spaniards use the verb elaborar, to elaborate, not
fabricar, to produce or manufacture. To elaborate something, Spain’s winemakers say,
implies consciousness, time, and the labor of creation and nurturance. It is different from
mere production. More than at any other time in recent history, Spanish wines truly are
being elaborated, and Spanish vintners have catapulted themselves to a far higher level of
quality. Indeed, Spain has regained its position as one of the most exciting and vibrant
gastronomic capitals of Europe. For Spanish wine (and food) a new golden age has begun.




 Along the banks of the Duero River lie the vineyards of Toro in the Castilla y León area of Spain. Winemaking began
here at the end of the 1st century B.C. In the 15th century, cuttings from Toro vines were some of the first brought to the
                                                   Americas from Spain.

   Spain is a country in love with its bittersweet past; the land itself seems to quicken with
the collective spirit of Cervantes, Ferdinand and Isabella, Goya, Franco, Picasso, El Cid,
Dalí, and Saint Teresa. And so, to understand Spain you must consider history and
tradition.
   Spain (indeed the whole Iberian Peninsula) is thought to be one of the important early
domestication sites for vines in Europe (Spanish grape varieties are genetically distinct
from French and Italian varieties, leading scientists away from the theory that Spain
acquired vines directly from either of those countries). Spain’s first wine regions were
probably established by proto-Celtic tribes who traveled out of North Africa around 2500
B.C. When the Phoenicians (seafaring groups of people—probably descended from
Canaanite tribes—who occupied the coastal cities of what is today modern Lebanon)
settled what would become the important southern Spanish trading port city of Cádiz in
1100 B.C., for example, they found grapevines already growing. But it was the ancient
Romans who amped up the Spanish wine industry, introducing the stone lagar (large
trough) so that significant amounts of grapes could be crushed (by foot) at the same time,
yielding generous batches of wine. After the disintegration of the Roman Empire in the
early fifth century, the entire Iberian Peninsula was overrun by successive tribes,
especially the Visigoths. The chaos finally ended in the critical year A.D. 711, when the
Moors (Muslims and Berbers of northwest Africa) advanced from the south and rapidly
took over most of the peninsula. Muslim domination lasted more than seven centuries. The
final defeat of the Moors at the southern village of Granada in 1492 (the same year
Christopher Columbus sailed, ultimately encountering the New World) marked the
beginning of Christian Spain under a single crown.
    For many Spanish vintners making wine with shiny, high-tech equipment, it seems as if
it was just yesterday that they were stripping down to shorts, hopping into the vats, and
crushing the grapes by foot. For all of the modernization the country has experienced,
Spanish winemakers continue to respect the wisdom of old ways—and the flavors that
result from them.
   Perhaps the biggest testament to this is the reverence accorded to indigenous varieties.
While winemakers in other countries are often quick to cast off their idiosyncratic native
grapes in favor of cabernet sauvignon, char-donnay, and other “global” varieties, Spanish
vintners have ambitiously pursued mencía, godello, hondarrabi zuri, cariñena, verdejo, and
a host of others. Spanish vintners are, quite simply, adamant about preserving their ancient
lineage of grape varieties.
   Another “flavor of tradition” is that imparted by long aging in barrels. Historically,
Spanish reds and whites were aged in barrels longer than any other wines in the world.
That could mean up to twenty-five years—a remarkable period of time. Modern tastes
have changed, and Spanish wines are no longer kept nearly as long in barrels—but the
flavor of, say, a Rioja gran reserva that has been aged in barrel for five years is still
considered a thing of beauty in Spain, and indeed, around the world.




       The massive bodegas in Jerez often house hundreds of thousands of barrels in which Sherry matures.

   The singular image of Spain as a blisteringly hot country has given rise to the
assumption that its wines must be big, coarse, and ponderous. This is patently not true in
the top wine regions, where the best wines can be breathtaking in their complexity. The
misunderstanding surely stems from Spain’s latitude, which is farther south than much of
Europe. But what many fail to realize is that the great Spanish vineyards are often at
altitudes well surpassing 1,000 feet (300 meters) above sea level, where weather
conditions are generally cooler. Geologically speaking, Spain is a giant rock lifted up out
of the Atlantic. It is—to provide a mind-blowing vision—the second most mountainous
country in Europe, after Switzerland.
   According to European Economic Community statistics, Spain has more land planted
with grapes than any other nation in the world—some 2.5 million acres (1 million
hectares). It does not, however, produce the most wine. For more than a decade, Spain has
ranked third in production, after Italy and France, due to the large number of old, low-
yielding vines planted on extremely dry, infertile land. There are approximately 5,500
bodegas (as wineries are known) and cooperatives.




   Spain has more land planted to vineyards than any other country in the world, and many of those vineyards are
   comprised of old “head trained” bush vines (not grown along a trellis). Here, the tempranillo vines of Bodega
                                                   Numanthia.

   Eighty-seven different varieties of grapes exist in Spain. Surprisingly, in a country
associated with red wine, the most widely planted grape by far is the white airén. Grown
on the central high plains of Don Quixote’s La Mancha, airén makes a snappy, crisp white
that is Spain’s answer to Italian pinot grigio. In contrast to simple airén, Spain’s top grape
varieties have even more personality. Such grapes as albariño and parellada (the white
grapes of Rías Baixas and the Penedès, respectively) are revered for their regional
character. But the country’s best-loved and most-prized grape is decidedly tempranillo—
the red grape that is the source of the legendary wines of Rioja and Ribera del Duero, plus
numerous other wines made throughout the country. Tempranillo is to Spain what cabernet
sauvignon is to Bordeaux or sangiovese is to Italy.
   The six most important wine regions are Rioja, Ribera del Duero, Jerez (the region that
produces Sherry), the Penedès, Rías Baixas, and Priorat. Following are sections on each of
these regions. But there are also dozens of other smaller, fascinating wine regions, most of
which are extremely old and now in the process of being revitalized. I’ve placed the most
important of these at the end of this chapter. For an explanation of Spanish wine law, see
the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 925.
RIOJA

For more than a century, Rioja has been considered Spain’s preeminent wine region. The
vineyards, running for 75 miles (120 kilometers) along both banks of the Ebro River,
cover more than 157,000 acres (63,500 hectares) in the remote interior of northern Spain.
Behind them, craggy mountains stand in desolation. While white and rosé wines are made
here, the region’s fabled reputation is built almost exclusively on reds, all of which are
based primarily on tempranillo grapes. Rioja is often referred to as Spain’s Bordeaux, and
the region’s ties to France are multiple. They begin in the Middle Ages with the camino
Francés, the French road, a route through Rioja named for French pilgrims who, with
millions of other devout Europeans, walked across northern Spain to the shrine of the
apostle James in Santiago de Compostela, in the far western province of Galicia.
   The signature of Rioja wines—long aging in oak barrels—was also inspired by French
practice. In 1780, a Rioja winemaker named Manuel Quintano adopted the Bordelaise
method of aging wine and began successfully maturing his wine in large French oak casks.
Although much more expensive than stone lagares, oak casks transformed his wines in a
way Quintano had never anticipated. By the 1850s, the Marqués de Murrieta and the
Marqués de Riscal (founders of two bodegas that are still considered among the region’s
best producers) were both using French oak—this time, small barrels—to age their wines.
Quickly, however, both Spaniards realized that the new “technology” of small oak barrels
would prove more economical if they brought in oak trees from North America (a place
toward which they felt a historical affinity) and coopered the wood themselves rather than
importing French barrels.

                                         THE NAME RIOJA
    The region of Rioja, so-called since the eleventh century, probably derived its name from the tiny Rio Oja,
    one of the seven tributaries of the Ebro River. A famous monastery, Santo Domingo de la Calzada, was
    located where the Rio Oja crossed the famous pilgrim’s route, the Camino Francés. The importance of
    this monastery meant that countless pilgrims congregated there before continuing their walk across all of
    northern Spain. Thus did the area Rioja—near the Rio Oja—become one of the early destinations in
    Spain.

   The 1850s and 1860s were difficult times for French vintners, and the winemakers of
both Rioja and the Penedès profited from the distress of their French counterparts. First
oidium, a parasitic fungus, attacked French vineyards. In its wake came the fatal
infestation of the insect phylloxera. To satisfy the demand for wine, French
merchant/négociants, called comisionados in Spanish, traveled to Rioja. Wine sales there
boomed. Within a single generation, the vineyard area in Rioja grew by 40,000 acres
(16,200 hectares).
   Some of the French who came to buy wine stayed and began bodegas of their own. By
buying grapes (rather than wine) from small, local vineyard owners, then vinifying the
grapes and aging the wine in traditional small oak barrels, the newcomers were able to
create wines that tasted as close as possible to the French wines they were used to.
    In 1880, with the first railroad link between the rural Rioja village of Haro and the
village of Bilbao on the northern coast, Rioja wines became far easier to ship into France.
Two years later, Haro got its first telephone; eight years later, its first electric light. Haro
became the nerve center of the wine community (which it remains), and Rioja wine
became essential to the French market. Commerce flourished.
   The party ended as the twentieth century dawned. Phylloxera crept into Rioja in 1901
and destroyed 70 percent of the vineyards. Meanwhile, the antidote—grafting native
European vines onto tolerant American root-stock—had been discovered. French vintners
quickly went about reestablishing their vineyards. Many of the French in Rioja returned
home, and the booming market for Rioja wine collapsed.
   The times ahead were Rioja’s darkest. Left without a major market, the industry
stagnated. A number of growers, financially destitute, simply sold their vineyards and left.
World War I, and later the Spanish Civil War, the Great Depression, and World War II
further impeded progress. Widespread hunger in Spain caused the government to decree
that vines be torn out and vineyard land be replanted with wheat. It was not until the 1970s
that Rioja began to regain its footing. Indeed, 1970, heralded as a major vintage of the
century, was a turning point for the region’s wine industry. Wines such as the 1970 R.
López de Heredia Viña Tondonia Gran Reserva, the 1970 Faustino Gran Reserva, and the
1970 La Rioja Alta Viña Ardanza are still considered national treasures.

                               THE QUICK SIP ON RIOJA
         RIOJA, historically considered Spain’s greatest wine region, is especially renowned for
         red wines made from the tempranillo grape.
         IN GENERAL, Rioja’s red wines are aged longer before release than most other wines
         in the world.
         TWO STYLES OF RIOJA EXIST—so-called traditional wines aged for especially long
         periods, usually in used American oak barrels, and modern alta expresión (high
         expression) wines, made from riper grapes and aged for shorter periods in new French
         oak barrels.
   Marques de Riscal, one of the oldest Rioja bodegas, was rebuilt in 2000 by world-famous architect Frank Gehry.

   With the return of Spain’s financial stability in the 1980s, investors turned their sights
on the extraordinary wines coming out of Rioja. In half a decade, the region had more than
a dozen new, well-capitalized bodegas. Many of the old bodegas modernized and
expanded. By this time, the technique of aging wine for long periods of time in small oak
barrels had been used for more than a century. The technique was not only ubiquitous, it
had become the region’s trademark.
   Today in Rioja, there are two philosophies about oak, and they exist side by side. The
traditionalists (whose numbers are dwindling) tend to use American oak and to cooper that
oak in Spain in the traditional manner. Interestingly, traditionalists often use old barrels to
mature their best wines, noting that older barrels impart a softer, gentler, less aggressive
flavor. And then they leave the wine in the barrels—potentially for a very long time, as
you’ll see. Modernists do the opposite—they tend to use high-impact brand-new French
oak, then mature the wine in it for far shorter periods. The issue is important, for oak has
an almost magical ability to transform wine, to lift it out of simple berryness and give it
depth, length, complexity, and intensity (see What Oak Does, page 48). The care taken is
key, since a wine kept in poor conditions for too long does not become mellow and
complex but, instead, becomes dried out and thin—a shadow of its former self.
                            THE OLD MAN AND THE WINE
 No American expatriot has loved Spain more than the novelist Ernest Hemingway (1899–1961).
 Although a legendary hard spirits drinker, Hemingway visited the famous old Rioja bodega Paternina
 every year for twenty-five years, generally with a bullfighter in tow. During his last visit, in 1959, the
 novelist was accompanied by the legendary bullfighter Antonio Ordóñez, who became the inspiration for
 Death in the Afternoon. In one of his best-loved works, A Moveable Feast, Hemingway wrote, “In Europe
 then we thought of wine as something as healthy and normal as food and also as a great giver of
 happiness and well being and delight. Drinking wine was not a snobbism nor a sign of sophistication nor
 a cult; it was as natural as eating and to me as necessary.”




   Thus, for wine drinkers today, two Riojas exist: an old world of well-aged, mellowed,
earthy wines laced with faint notes of vanilla, and a new world of fruit-driven, more
dramatically oaky wines in what might be called an extroverted style.
The old cellars of R. López de Heredia, one of the oldest bodegas in Rioja. Thanks in part to their long aging, the wines
      from the estate—both red and white—are considered quintessential examples of traditionally styled Rioja.

   While the ranks of the modernists are growing, it is unlikely that Rioja’s winemakers
will ever fully abandon the practice of significant wood aging. Maturing a wine is almost a
moral imperative for Spaniards. The sheer number of barrels in Rioja is a testimony to
this; many bodegas have ten thousand or more, and the region as a whole is reported to
possess just over 1.3 million barrels. And no matter the shift toward modernity, as a group,
Riojas are still aged longer before release than almost any other wines in the world. While
most Bordeaux and California reds are aged two years or less in oak, in Rioja, three to six
years is common. As long as this is, by modern standards, it is far shorter than in the past,
when the top Rioja reds were often aged at the bodega for fifteen to twenty years or more
before they were sold to consumers. In an example that is almost unbelievable today but
was quite common in Rioja not so many years ago, the renowned estate of Marqués de
Murrieta released their 1942 gran reserva in 1983—forty-one years after it was made!
    A word about price. Rioja’s long-aged gran reservas remain among the best deals in the
world. A supple, complex red Rioja with ten years of aging often costs no more than a
New World chardonnay made (and priced) by someone with a healthy ego. Nowhere else
in the world can you drink so well, so reasonably. On the other hand, in recent years, what
I’d call radically inexpensive Rioja has flowed onto the market. Most of these are crianzas
at rock-bottom prices. Don’t be tempted. The majority of these very low-end wines smell
bad and taste murky. They are, I promise, not what you had in mind.
   Finally, Rioja was the first region in Spain to carry the designation DOCa
(Denominación de Origen Calificada), a status awarded it in 1991. To be granted DOCa
status, a wine region must meet the highest standards in its winemaking and viticultural
practices.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Although it is only 60 miles (97 kilometers) south of the Bay of Biscay and the northern
coastal cities of San Sebastián and Bilbao, Rioja does not have a maritime climate. Several
small mountain ranges and the outlying ridges of the Cantabrian Mountains—a spur of the
Pyrenees—isolate the region from the moderating effects of the Atlantic Ocean, and they
also help act as a shield, shutting out the harshest northern winds.
                                   THE GRAPES OF RIOJA
                                                WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: Permissible as a blending component in white Rioja since 2007, but may not dominate
 the blend or constitute the entire wine. Contributes finesse.
 GARNACHA BLANCA: Minor blending grape added for body.
 MALVASIA: Minor blending grape added for aroma.
 MATURANA BLANCA AND TURRUNTÉS: Minor grapes permitted by law but, in practice, yet to be
 widely used.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC AND VERDEJO: Like chardonnay, these grapes are now allowed in white Rioja,
 but only in amounts less than 50 percent. Considered to have excellent potential as blending grapes with
 viura.
 TEMPRANILLO BLANCO: A white mutation of tempranillo discovered in the late 1980s in the Baja
 district of Rioja. It shows promise in the making of snappy, lightly aromatic whites. Currently planted only
 in tiny amounts.
 VIURA: A major grape in all Rioja white wines. It contributes aroma, mild fruit flavors, and good acidity.
 The same grape as macabeo in the Penedès.

                                                  REDS
 GARNACHA: Important Spanish grape used to contribute juiciness and body. Known in France as
 grenache.
 GRACIANO: An important grape for its intense color, flavor, and ability to retain acidity. Despite its
 qualities, it has fallen out of favor with some growers because it ripens very late. Represents less than 1
 percent in most Rioja blends.
 MATURANA TINTA AND MATURANO: Ancient native varieties allowed to be used in a blend. In
 practice, only tiny amounts are grown and available.
 MAZUELO: Robust grape used in some red Riojas. Known in Priorat as cariñena and in France as
 carignan.
 TEMPRANILLO: Major indigenous grape used in the vast majority of red Riojas. Contributes aroma,
 flavor, and aging potential.

   Although Spanish vineyards are often imagined to be at about sea level, Rioja rests on a
vast plateau at an elevation of more than 1,500 feet (460 meters). The region is divided
into three subregions: Rioja Alta, Rioja Alavesa, and Rioja Baja. The finest grapes come
from Rioja Alta and Rioja Alavesa, which, being higher and farther north and west,
toward the Atlantic, experience a cooler climate. The land then slopes downward to the
warmer, lower, drier Rioja Baja, in the southeast—the only part of Rioja that experiences a
more Mediterranean climate. Grapes there make wines that tend to be higher in alcohol
and lower in acidity.
   Three types of soil dominate: clay mixed with limestone and sandstone, iron-rich clay,
and loamy soil with alluvial silt from the Ebro. The best vineyards are planted in
clay/limestone/sandstone soils found mostly in Rioja Alavesa and Rioja Alta. Many of
these vineyards are forty years old or more. Though not very productive, old vines are
treasured because their grapes usually have more concentrated flavors.
                       AGING REQUIREMENTS FOR RIOJA
 While the law dictates the minimum length of time a Rioja must be aged, in practice many are aged for
 much longer.

                                               CRIANZAS
 WHITES: Must be aged for six months in oak barrels.
 REDS: Must be aged for at least two years, one of which must be in oak barrels.

                                               RESERVAS
 WHITES: Must be aged for two years, six months of which must be in oak barrels.
 REDS: Must be aged for at least three years, one of which must be in oak barrels.

                                         GRAN RESERVAS
 WHITES: Must be aged for four years, one year of which must be in oak barrels.
 REDS: Must be aged for at least five years, two of which must be in oak barrels and the remaining three
 of which must be in bottles.




              The old vines of Marques de Caceres are spaced far apart in the parched, infertile soil.

   Like Bordeaux, after which they were modeled, Rioja wines have traditionally been
blends of grapes. For reds, the finest grape, and the one that accounted for a lion’s share of
the blend, was tempranillo, a variety that originated somewhere in the province of Rioja,
or in Navarra, next door. (Only one of tempranillo’s parents has been identified—albillo
mayor, a white grape from Ribera del Duero.)
   In Rioja, three other grapes could be added to tempranillo: the native Spanish varieties
garnacha (which the French call grenache), mazuelo (which the French call carignan), and
graciano (the name means “graceful,” but despite the quality of this grape, only minuscule
amounts are now available because the grape is difficult to grow and ripens late). Today,
while many Riojas continue to be blends, a growing number are made up entirely of
tempranillo.
   A word on tempranillo. The name of this early-ripening variety comes from temprano
(Spanish for early). Depending on whether a modern style or traditional style wine is
being made, tempranillo grown in Rioja can either be powerfully structured, dark, and
earthy, with notes of leather and a certain peatiness (the modern style), or elegant and very
earthy—with an attractive dirtlike aroma—closer to pinot noir than to cabernet sauvignon
(the traditional style).
                              THE WORLD’S BEST ROSÉS
 French rosés may be more famous, but the best Spanish rosés (rosados) are usually better—lighter,
 fresher, less weighty, more elegant. Full of wild strawberry, ripe watermelon, and juniper berry flavors,
 they are like a cool shower on a hot day. Spanish rosés can be made from a number of different grapes,
 but most are made from either garnacha or tempranillo. Often they are made by saignée—sangrado in
 Spanish—the process of “bleeding” pink juice off a red wine-to-be. With the possible exception of the
 coastal northwest, they are made all over Spain, although many of the best known come from Rioja and
 Navarra. Garlicky seafood dishes and paella are especially good partners, but the wine is so delicious, all
 it really needs is a summer evening.

   Rioja is not known for its white wines (90 percent of the wine produced is red),
although good basic white wines are made. These are simple, crisp, fresh wines, almost
always made mainly from the grape variety viura (known as macabeo in other regions of
Spain). The New York Times wine reporter and critic Eric Asimov may have captured
white Rioja wines best when he called them “pinot grigios with a brain.” Although it is
rare now, one can also still occasionally come across the traditional style of white Rioja—
viura that has been made in oak then aged in oak for years until it takes on a resiny,
honied, waxy, oxidized character. These old-style white Riojas—today made principally
by the two firms Marqués de Murietta and R. López de Heredia—can be spellbinding
wines, though they are nothing if not an acquired taste.
   In the past, most of Rioja’s 375 or so bodegas owned no land at all, but instead bought
grapes and/or wine from the region’s 17,000 small growers, most of whom owned fewer
than 10 acres (4 hectares) of land. Today, while the majority of bodegas still buy some
grapes and wine from growers, there is a strong movement toward ownership of
vineyards.
                      SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF RIOJA
   Baron de Ley Finca Monasterio • Bodegas Artadi • Bodegas Breton • Bodegas Fernando Remirez de
  Ganuza • Compañía de Vinos Telmo Rodriguez • Contino • Coto de Imaz • CUNE • Finca Allende • Finca
  Valpiedra • La Granja Nuestra Señora de Remelluri • La Rioja Alta • Marqués de Cáceres • Marqués de
        Riscal • Martinez Bujanda • Muga • R. López de Heredia • Roda • Sierra Cantabria • Ysios
            CRIANZA, RESERVA, AND GRAN RESERVA

While bodegas in Rioja are not legally obliged to use it, a hierarchy exists whereby wines
are classified according to how long the wines are aged (see box page 438). The hierarchy
includes crianza (the youngest; in Spanish the word refers to something that is raised or
nursed), reserva, and gran reserva. When visiting Rioja, you might also encounter very
basic, very young wines known as vinos jovenes or sin crianzas. They are usually not
exported.




The foods of Rioja are simple and simply prepared, reflecting the region’s rural roots. Mushrooms sizzling on a grill will
                 become a feast once bottles of earthy, complex Rioja reserva are opened and poured.


                                             WET AND WILD
     Although wild mushrooms (setas) are more abundant and varied in Catalonia, they somehow seem more
     decadent in Rioja, where they are often each the size of a DVD, and where a glass of red wine and a huge
     plate of them sizzling in hot, garlicky, extra virgin olive oil is often the way a meal begins. The
     combination, straightforward as it is, can be magic. No wine accentuates the rich earthiness of wild
     mushrooms better than red Rioja, which is among the world’s most beautifully earthy wines.

   Red crianzas are easy-drinking wines full of earth, spice, cherry, and vanilla. The
bread-and-butter wines of every bodega, crianzas are generally made with grapes from
good but not exceptional vineyards.
   Made from superior grapes from prime sites, reservas are more than just simple, fruity
wines, and although they are far more concentrated than crianzas, they are not necessarily
powerhouses. In fact, just the opposite can be true. Reservas can be subtle, supple wines
with quiet but intense echoes of earth, old saddle leather, and dried leaves. Reservas are
made only in exceptional years.
   Gran reservas, also made only in exceptional years, come from the very best vineyards
of all and are extremely rare. In most years, gran reservas represent just 1 to 10 percent of
the wines produced. In particular, white gran reservas are very uncommon and are now
made only by a handful of bodegas. Red gran reservas are elegant, silky, and refined.
They are aged the longest in the oldest, most neutral barrels. In fact, although five years of
aging is required by law, in practice gran reservas may be aged far longer.
                             THE FOODS OF RIOJA

If you are not vigilant, you can find yourself craving—and eating—roasted baby lamb
and, if it’s spring, fresh white asparagus every day in Rioja, a testimony to just how
addictive these two specialties can be. Lamb and white asparagus, however, are just the
beginning.
   Rioja is a region of basic foodstuffs, straightforward cooking techniques, and hearty
dishes. The success of any given dish is based solely on the integrity and freshness of the
ingredients. Herbs and spices are rarely used. The simple homeyness of the food is
beautifully in tune with the elegant, sweetly ripe flavors and silky textures of Rioja wines.
    The fertile Ebro River valley is planted with a panoply of vegetables and fruits; the
surrounding hills and mountains are home to goats, lambs, rabbits, quail, and large wild
game. Rioja’s goat cheeses are renowned. The cabrito (baby goat) roasted in a brick oven
is to die for. And, as is true in many inland regions of Spain, the local embutido
(charcuterie) is irresistible.
   The names of many dishes include the words a la riojana—in the Rioja style.
Generally, this means that tomatoes and fresh or dried sweet red peppers are part of the
preparation. Rioja’s classics include:
   Chuletas al sarmiento: Lamb chops grilled over an open fire of vine shoots.
    Menestra de verduras: A vegetable casserole that, depending on the season, includes
artichokes, asparagus, Swiss chard, peas, carrots, leeks, or green beans tossed together
with diced, cured ham and sautéed in olive oil.
   Patatas a la riojana: Potatoes cooked in meat stock with spicy chorizo sausage.
  Pochas a la riojana: A stew of young white beans, chorizo, peppers, and tomatoes,
sometimes with roasted quail added.
   Pimientos rellenos: Small, sweet local red peppers stuffed with minced meat or shrimp
or puréed vegetables, then dipped in batter, fried, and cooked in a wine and tomato sauce.
Sometimes cod, hake, or pig’s feet are added to the stuffing.

                              WHEN YOU VISIT… RIOJA
         Some of the most impressive Rioja bodegas are a trip back in time. A century or more
         old, they have dark, damp cellars covered with mold and cobwebs and filled with bottles
         of decades-old Rioja. R. López de Heredia and Federico Paternina are good examples.
         IF YOU LOVE ART or architecture, a must-visit is Marqués de Riscal. The bodega was
         rebuilt starting in 2000 by world-famous architect Frank Gehry (who also designed the
         Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain) and the bodega’s soaring, rippled roof looks
         like giant curls of white chocolate on top of a layer cake.
         IN THE CITY OF BRIONES, the bodega Dinastía Vivanco houses an impressive wine
         museum with permanent exhibits on the history, culture, and technology of winemaking,
         as well as rotating hands-on activities.
                              The Rioja Wines to Know
Riojas are among the most sophisticated wines of the Old World. They have a special place in my heart, for these
were the wines that, at the beginning of my career, spoke to me about the meaning of wine. After being in and
tasting Rioja, I understood that wine was the voice of a place and a culture.

                                                   WHITES




                                        R. LÓPEZ DE HEREDIA
                                          VIÑA TONDONIA | RESERVA
                                    Approximately 90% viura, 10% malvasia
R. López de Heredia is one of the pillars of traditional winemaking in Rioja, and their reputation for quality is rock
solid. The bodega makes both red and white Viña Tondonia (reserva and gran reserva), all of which are great
classics. But I write about the white reserva here for, with just a few exceptions, it now stands alone as testament to
a time long ago when aged white Riojas were considered jewels in the region’s crown. Everything about this
bonedry wine, from the color (like wildflower honey) to the finish (extremely long), is mesmerizing. In top years,
the aroma evokes fresh butter, roasted hazelnuts, candle wax, chamomile, sea salt, and sweet earth; the flavor adds a
sense of exotic citrus and something at once nutty and honeyed, like baklava. And the texture, not to be dismissed,
feels like ribbons of cream.
                             LA GRANJA NUESTRA SEÑORA DE REMELLURI

                                                     BLANCO
    Approximately 25% garnacha blanca, 25% roussanne and marsanne, with 10% each of viognier,
            chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, and moscatel; plus small amounts petit courbut
While Remelluri’s red Rioja is delicious and impeccable, the bodega’s white Rioja is a contender for the most
complex white wine of Spain. Made from an intriguing lineup of grapes, it’s a wine of rare beauty and grace,
which, when I have it, always reminds me of one of the most exquisite aged white Bordeaux (although the
Remelluri costs a good deal less). The wine’s aromas surge forward on wafts of candle wax, Danish pastry, sweet
pineapple, dried herbs, and a resiny chaparral that smells like the Riojan countryside. The flavors follow the same
complex trajectory, ending with something minerally that makes one crave a grilled fish. The estate’s origins date
back to the fourteenth century, when monks from the Toloño monastery founded a sanctuary and farm at the site.
The modern winery was established in 1967, when Jaime Rodríguez Salís purchased the vineyards at the heart of
the monastery’s lands.

                                                     REDS
                                                      CUNE
                                              IMPERIAL | RESERVA
                         Approximately 85% tempranillo, 10% graciano, 5% mazuelo
Founded in 1879, CUNE (the abbreviation for Compañía Vinicola del Norte de España; for ease of pronounciation,
the V of Vinicola appears as a U on the label; pronounced COON-ay) makes reservas that perfectly demonstrate
aged Rioja’s delicacy. Subtle aromas and flavors of truffles, dried leaves, spices, cassis, rose petals, and old saddle
leather seem to peek out from the wine. CUNE’s Imperial Gran Reservas are also stunners—as complex in flavor as
the best dark chocolates, with an equally hedonistic and elegant texture.




                                                 LA RIOJA ALTA

                                    VIÑA ARDANZA | RESERVA ESPECIAL
                                Approximately 80% tempranillo, 20% garnacha
Viña Ardanza Reserva Especial is made only in the very greatest vintages—sometimes no more than once every ten
years. The wine’s refinement and superb quality are immediately apparent; indeed, the first sip of this wine is so
comforting, it’s akin to being wrapped up in a warm cashmere blanket. The aromas are rich and earthy—saddle
leather, black truffles, and damp forest. They open up onto elegant flavors reminiscent of vanilla, plums, dark
chocolate, and spiced tea, and the texture is lanolin soft.
                                                       MUGA

                                        PRADO ENEA | GRAN RESERVA
                Approximately 80% tempranillo, with 20% garnacha, mazuelo, and graciano
Dating from 1932, Muga is a highly respected family-owned bodega making some of the top traditional-style wines
in Rioja. Like the best red Burgundies, these are Riojas with magnificent and complex aromas and a long finish. In
the middle are sublime, if subtle, layers of earthy flavor. Prado Enea is the name of the winery’s refined gran
reserva, made only in great years and generally aged eight years, four of them in barrels that the Muga family
makes themselves. The grapes for this wine come from vineyards that are among the highest in altitude in the
region. In the 1990s, Muga also began making small quantities of what is now a highly sought-after modernist
wine, Torre Muga. Big, muscular, concentrated, and oaky (it’s aged in both American and French oak), Torre Muga
is New World in style and very much the opposite of Prado Enea.




                                                        RODA

                                                RODA I | RESERVA
                                                  100% tempranillo
The Roda bodega makes three modernist wines from among the largest selections of tempranillo clones in
existence. Roda I has lovely, saturated, dramatic flavors reminiscent of dried cranberries, violets, exotic spices,
licorice, and vanilla. Yet the underlying sexy earthiness of Rioja is also evident as aromas of bark, peat, cedar, and
forest come alive in the glass. I especially love the blanket of cocoalike dustiness that Roda I leaves on one’s palate
—as if the wine were perfectly poised for the crusty, fatty edge of a grilled lamb chop. Roda I’s big sister is Roda II,
an even more concentrated (and more expensive) wine, and it’s big big sister is called Cirsion, one of the most
expensive and complex Riojas made.
                                             R. LÓPEZ DE HEREDIA

                                      VIÑA TONDONIA | GRAN RESERVA
                Approximately 75% tempranillo, 15% garnacha, 10% mazuelo and graciano
The red Viña Tondonia gran reservas are nothing if not mind-blowing for their elegance and finesse. In great
vintages, drinking them is like being in that state before waking up when all sensations seem dreamlike. Both the
aromas and flavors are exceedingly supple and complex, with hints of exotic spices, forests, damp mushrooms, and
earth. Viña Tondonia is a quiet, refined, long-aged wine, not a powerhouse (the wine is commonly aged nine to ten
years in barrel, then at least another eight years in bottle before release). It’s considered one of the great classic
Riojas, and is renowned in Spain. The name of the wine—Tondonia—refers to a meander, or bend, along the banks
of the Ebro near the bodega. Through this meander, known as Tondon (from the Latin retondo), ran the old
medieval road that led from Rioja to the Basque country.
Counting sheep. In Ribera del Duero, it’s a mule’s lot in life.
RIBERA DEL DUERO

A two-hour drive north of Madrid, Ribera del Duero is in the province of Castilla y León,
a severe, dramatic land of rough mesas and rocky plateaus that stretch as far as the eye can
see. Massive stone castles stand as fortresses atop the highest ridges. The masculine power
and glory of medieval Spain is palpable.
   On these high, dry, sunny plains, the vineyards, too, have a severity. Old vines, gnarled
as if in agony, protrude from the rough ground. If the ground holds vines in place
everywhere else in the world, in Ribera del Duero the opposite seems true. Earth herself
clings to the muscular vines.
   Ribera del Duero is almost exclusively a red wine region, although simple rosés are
made for local consumption. The best reds are bold, concentrated, ripe, mouthfilling,
structured, and packed with dark flavors reminiscent of roasted coffee, cocoa, peat, and
black licorice. Yet the very best of them are also lusciously refined. Indeed, three Ribera
del Duero wines—Unico (made by Vega-Sicilia), Pingus, and Pesquera—are among the
most outstanding red wines anywhere in the world.
    There are more than 250 wine estates in Ribera del Duero. The major grape variety,
tinto fino (also known as tinta del país), is another name for the variety tempranillo. But,
according to research by the Instituto Tecnológico Agrario de Castilla y León, there are, of
course, clonal differences. After centuries of adaptation, the tempranillo clones that exist
in Ribera del Duero are quite different from those in Rioja. Thanks to Ribera del Duero’s
harsh, dramatic climate, tinto fino’s smaller berries and tougher skins make wines that are
often more powerful (but occasionally less polished) than Rioja.

                   THE QUICK SIP ON RIBERA DEL DUERO
         RIBERA DEL DUERO is the poster image of conquistador Spain, a land of rugged
         ocher mesas. All of its top wines are red and based on the grape tinto fino, the name of
         a group of clones of tempranillo.
         THE MOST LEGENDARY and expensive red wine in Spain, Vega-Sicilia’s Unico, is
         made here.
         RIBERA DEL DUERO’S TOP WINES are concentrated, richly textured, and among the
         longest lived of all Spanish red wines.

    Ribera del Duero is named for the river Duero, the third largest river on the Iberian
Peninsula. The river crosses the great meseta (high plateau) of north central Spain,
ultimately plunging down into Portugal, where it becomes the Douro (linked famously to
Port wine) and finally empties into the Atlantic Ocean.
    In Ribera del Duero, the river forms a 22-mile-wide (35-kilometer) valley with
flattopped mountains on either side. Vineyards, interspersed among fields of grain and
sugar beets, are scattered along a 71-mile-long (115-kilometer) strip on the north and
south sides of the valley. According to the region’s official Denominación de Origen
(DO), Ribera del Duero spans four districts within Castilla y León: Burgos, in the center
of the DO, with the vast majority of vineyard land; Valladolid, to the west; and Segovia
and Soria to the south and east, respectively.
        OUNCE FOR OUNCE, MORE EXPENSIVE THAN WINE
Wine aside, perhaps the most prized agricultural product of the high plains of central Spain—especially
in Castilla y León—is saffron, widely considered the most expensive spice in the world (Princesa de
Minaya, considered one of the best brands of the highest grade of saffron, retails for more than $4,000
per pound). Indeed, saffron is one of Spain’s most ancient crops—an indispensable seasoning (and
source of vibrant color) in many classic dishes, including paella. The stigmas of the flowers of Crocus
sativus, saffron is harvested each fall by hand—usually by women whose fingers fly as they quickly pick
the fields of delicate purple flowers and then, equally quickly (and gently), remove the three single, bright
red threads that, once dried, become saffron. Between fifty thousand and seventy thousand flowers are
required for one pound of saffron; amazingly, the fastest pickers harvest up to thirty thousand flowers in a
day.
  Besides Spain, the saffron crocus is also cultivated in Italy, Greece, Morocco, India, and Iran; the latter
country now produces an estimated 90 percent of the world’s saffron.
             THE BODEGAS THAT SPARKED A REVOLUTION
 Made in a remote and rocky part of the Duero, Vega-Sicilia is Spain’s most legendary and expensive
 wine. Even Spanish schoolchildren know its name. While most other bodegas in Ribera del Duero were
 making innocuous wine throughout the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, Vega-Sicilia had long before embarked
 on making superb wine. This early commitment to quality in a region that was untested at the time—at
 least for fine wine—established Vega-Sicilia as an extremely serious estate. The fact that the wines were
 stunning only cemented the winery’s reputation further. Vega-Sicilia wines would have been exceptional
 in most contexts, but against the backdrop of what was happening (or not happening) in Ribera del
 Duero for decades, they were otherworldly.
     Then, in the 1970s, a second bodega, Pesquera, also began to build a reputation for remarkable
 wines. Pesquera is owned by Alejandro Fernández, an energetic maverick who is convinced that Ribera
 del Duero is potentially one of the world’s best wine regions. After a full career making agricultural
 equipment, Fernández built Pesquera, planted vineyards, and started making what he called “masculine”
 wines. Tiny lot by tiny lot, he pressed the grapes in an old wooden press (used until 1982). The wines
 were put into barrels immediately after pressing and left to ferment and age. They were never filtered.
 Filtering a wine, Fernández said, was like “pushing a fat man through a keyhole.” The body invariably got
 damaged.
    Like Vega-Sicilia, Pesquera turned out to be a profoundly rich and complex wine. After both bodegas
 began to receive worldwide attention in the 1980s, new capital—and new talent—flooded into Ribera del
 Duero. Among the most influential winemakers to come in was the Danish-born, Bordeaux-trained
 winemaker Peter Sisseck. Hired first as a consultant in Ribera del Duero, Sisseck was so impressed by
 the region and its potential that he founded his own winery—Dominio de Pingus—in 1995. Pingus has
 gone on to be one of the stars of Spain, and a wine that, along with its “little” sister, Flor de Pingus, is
 frequently named as one of the most extraordinary wines in the world.
    A new era for Ribera del Duero was born.

   During much of the Middle Ages, Castilla was the battleground on which the Catholic
kings fought the Moors, the Islamic conquerors who invaded Spain in 711. The stark,
ponderous fortresses and castles along the Duero date from this time. Although grapes
were grown throughout the upheavals, it was not until Spain was completely reconquered
by the Catholic monarchs in the fifteenth century that Ribera del Duero, free of political
conflict, could come into its own as a wine region. The city of Valladolid became the
capital of Spain; Ferdinand and Isabella were married there in the late fifteenth century.
   From the beginning of the twentieth century until the 1980s, Ribera del Duero was a
wine region known primarily for cheap, gruff reds churned out by cooperatives that had
been built with government subsidies after the 1950s. Mediocrity reigned. Most wines,
even as late as 1970, were made in unclean barrels and left unattended to ferment at will.
The wines were seldom racked off their lees, never filtered, and rarely bottled
commercially. Customers simply arrived at the bodega with reusable containers and
bought what they needed directly from the barrel.
    Ribera del Duero reservas are made only in exceptional years and are aged at least three years before release.

   An enormous turnaround came in the 1980s. The success of two exceptional wineries,
Vega-Sicilia and Pesquera, inspired an influx of capital and technical skill, plus a new
passion for quality. By the mid-1990s, the wines coming out of the region were so
shockingly good that some Spanish wine lovers suggested Ribera del Duero—rather than
Rioja—might just be the finest wine region in Spain.
  Today, the region contains some of Spain’s most successful wineries—from the historic
Vega-Sicilia, to lauded avant-garde estates such as Pingus, Abadía Retuerta, Alion, and
Mauro. Indeed, these five estates, all lined up along Castilla’s N22 highway, form Spanish
wine country’s so-called milla de oro, golden mile.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Despite its gentle-sounding name, Ribera del Duero is a region of harsh intensity; bodega
owners call it the land of extremes. Sunlight—2,400 hours of it per year—is intense;
rainfall is modest. Summers are blistering, with temperatures often exceeding 100°F
(38°C). Winters are fiercely cold, sometimes reaching –20°F (–29°C). On any given day
during the grapes’ ripening cycle, the diurnal temperature fluctuation is dramatic—from
scorchingly hot in the afternoon to cold at night. Grapes love this, for hot daytime
temperatures allow the grapes to ripen at full speed, while cold nights temporarily shut
down photosynthesis, letting the vine rest and preserving acidity.

                               YOU SAY TINTO; I SAY TINTA
    As many drinkers of Ribera del Duero wines know, the main grape variety is, somewhat confusingly,
    called both tinta del país and tinto fino. Why? Historically, locals referred to these simple wines (and the
    grapes they were made from) as tinta del país—“red [wine] of the land.” As time went on and higher-
    quality wines were made in Ribera del Duero, the term tinto fino—“fine red”—was increasingly used to
    describe both the wines and the grapes.

   Except for the bodegas built since the late 1980s, the landscape here seems unchanged
by passing centuries. For much of the year Ribera del Duero is a brown, almost desolate
place. Above ground, dirt fields stretch endlessly, hiding crops of sugar beets below.
Villages appear subdued and turned inward, away from travelers. In some parts of the
region, the only signs of life come from the omnipresent flocks of long-legged, black-
eared Churra sheep crossing the road, bringing drivers to a dead halt no matter how late
that driver might be for a winery appointment.
   There are approximately 52,000 acres (21,000 hectares) of vines in Ribera del Duero—
a modest amount compared, say, to Rioja, which has just over 157,000 acres (63,500
hectares). And thanks to the number of old vines, yields tend to be very low (about 1.6
tons to the acre).
                        THE GRAPES OF RIBERA DEL DUERO
 Ribera del Duero is planted almost exclusively with red grape varieties. The lone white variety, albillo
 mayor, is planted in tiny amounts and is not commercially significant. That said, albillo mayor does have
 a claim to fame: It is known to be one of the parents of tempranillo.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Makes up just 1 percent of the grapes planted in Ribera del Duero—and
 virtually all of that by the bodega Vega-Sicilia. The bodega also has minuscule plantings of merlot and
 malbec.
 GARNACHA: A minor grape in this region, made into locally consumed, inexpensive rosés.
 TINTO FINO: A major grape variety used almost exclusively in virtually all red wines. Also known locally
 as tinta del país. While the variety is the same as tempranillo, the clones that make up tinto fino are
 different from the clones of tempranillo that grow in Rioja and elsewhere in Spain.




 Ribera del Duero is called a land of extremes. Old gnarled vines endure freezing cold winters and blistering summers.

   Then there are the vines themselves, which seem imbued with a life force all their own.
Planted on Spain’s grand high plateau, known as the meseta, 2,500 to 2,800 feet (760 to
850 meters) above sea level, the vines look like small, stunted arms protruding no more
than a foot or two out of the earth. Most are still planted in the traditional manner, without
posts, wires, or trellising of any sort. Many vines are thirty to fifty years old or more and
thus produce grapes with concentrated flavor.
   There are two general types of soil. Nearest the Duero River and its small tributaries,
the soils are composed of sandy sediments, marl, and ancient riverbed stones. The higher
vineyards—which are considered some of the best—are on slopes (known as laderas)
above the riverbeds and contain more limestone and clay.
    As for the Duero River itself, although it is neither wide nor deep nor particularly grand
(at least as it flows through Ribera del Duero), it does help temper the region’s dry, harsh
climate. The river adds moisture to the air, and in summer the riverbanks buffer the hot,
dry winds that sweep through the valley. In fall and spring the river’s stabilizing warmth
helps protect against frost.
   In Ribera del Duero, tinto fino accounts for the lion’s share of all plantings, and all the
top wines are made almost entirely from it.




Ribera del Duero is a vast agricultural area which, besides producing wine, is devoted to raising sheep. Spanish sheep
           have a particular talent for torpidly crossing the road when you’re trying to get someplace fast.

             SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF RIBERA DEL DUERO
  Aalto • Abadía Retuerta • Alejandro Fernández/Pesquera • Alion • Alonso del Yerro • Arzuaga • Astrales •
   Condado de Haza • Dominio de Pingus • Emilio Moro • Ismael Arroyo • Legaris • Mauro • O. Fournier •
    Penalba Herraiz/Carravid • Pérez Pascuas/Viña Pedrosa • Protos • Reyes • Valdubón • Vega-Sicilia
         CRIANZA, RESERVA, AND GRAN RESERVA

As is true in Rioja, Ribera del Duero wines can be classified according to the quality of
the grapes and how long the wines are aged. I say “can be” because some modern
producers choose not to use the designations. For those that do, wines fall into the
categories crianza, reserva, and gran reserva. (In Ribera del Duero itself, you might also
come across simple, grapey wines known as tintos joven—young reds—but these are
almost never exported.)
                                           VEGA-SICILIA
 Today, Vega-Sicilia, Ribera del Duero’s most legendary estate is owned by the Alvarez family. (The name
 is a mystery. Vega is the word for the green part of a riverbank. Sicilia evolved from St. Cecilia and is not,
 as is commonly thought, a reference to the Italian island of Sicily.)
    Vega-Sicilia’s vineyards were first planted in 1864 by Don Eloy Lecanda, a winemaker who had
 studied in Bordeaux and returned to Castilla bringing eighteen thousand vine cuttings of cabernet
 sauvignon, merlot, malbec, and pinot noir with him. These grapes were combined with tinto fino to
 become the first Vega-Sicilia wines. Today, about 80 percent of Vega-Sicilia’s 617 acres (250 hectares) of
 vineyards are planted with tinto fino, and the remainder with cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and malbec.
 Many of the vines are more than a century old.
    Vega-Sicilia makes three wines: Valbuena 5, so named because it is sold after five years of aging; the
 very prestigious Reserva Especial (a blend of vintages); and the utterly rare Unico (Spanish for unique).
 Unico is aged in a succession of large and small oak barrels until the winemaker feels it is perfectly ready
 to drink, which, as it happens, is rarely in less than ten years and not according to any regular marketing
 schedule. Amazingly, the bodega released both its 1982 and 1968 Unicos in the same year—1991.
 That’s after nine and twenty-three years of aging, respectively. This practice makes Unico one of the
 world’s longest-aged reds before release. Among Unico’s best customers are King Juan Carlos of Spain
 and England’s Prince Charles, along with collectors around the world.

   Crianzas are good, easy-drinking wines with cherry pie, spice, earth, and vanilla
flavors and aromas. These wines generally come from good but not exceptional vineyards.
Made from superior grapes grown at better sites, reservas have a fuller, fleshier texture
and greater overall depth, concentration, and intensity. Coming from the very best
vineyards, gran reservas are the most polished and refined wines of all. Reservas and gran
reservas are usually made only in above-average years. They represent just a small
percentage of all the wine made in the region.

      In Ribera del Duero, old vines, gnarled as if in agony, protrude from the rough
      ground. If the ground holds vines in place everywhere else in the world, here,
      the opposite seems true. The earth herself clings to the muscular vines.

   Here’s what the categories mean:
CRIANZA:  Aged a minimum of two years, at least one of which must be in oak barrels; the
year starts October 1.
RESERVA:   Aged a minimum of three years, at least one of which must be in oak barrels; the
year starts December 1.
GRAN RESERVA: Wines of outstanding quality, made in select vintage years only. Aged a
minimum of five years, at least two of which must be in oak barrels; the year starts
December 1.
Lechazo—baby lamb cooked slowly in a wood-fired oven until the tender meat falls off the bone—is the quintessential
meal in Ribera del Duero. An exercise in carnivorousness, the meat is accompanied by nothing but a little salad and a
                                                  lot of tinto fino.
               THE FOODS OF RIBERA DEL DUERO

The legendary dish of Ribera del Duero is lechazo, a baby lamb fed only mother’s milk
and weighing less than 15 pounds (7 kilograms). In fact, lechazo is sometimes the only
dish served in the best asadores—simple, tavernlike roast houses—which can be found
throughout the region. The heavenly aroma of roast baby lamb can be smelled several
blocks away from an asador, and it is hard to pass up.
   The chef of each asador, who is usually also the owner, buys his lamb directly from
shepherds, and butchers it himself. He seasons it with only a sprinkle of salt and pepper,
then slowly roasts it in a cuenco (a ceramic roasting dish) over a hardwood fire in an old
brick oven until the meat is seared crackling crisp on the outside and so meltingly tender
on the inside that it falls off the bone.
   Eating lechazo is an experience in pure carnivorousness. In rustic asadores, nothing is
served with the central attraction except a sharp knife and a fork, a bottle or carafe of
Ribera del Duero, and a small salad of lettuce and tomatoes. At slightly more upscale
asadores, you might begin with a plate of garlicky grilled setas (wild mushrooms) or
grilled morcilla (blood sausage stuffed with rice). Finally, there will be páramo de
Guzmán, an artisanal cheese made from the milk of a special breed of Churra sheep, and
cuajada, creamy, tangy sheep’s milk yogurt served in an earthenware jar. Into the yogurt,
you spoon the local honey.

                  WHEN YOU VISIT… RIBERA DEL DUERO
         MOST TOURS OF BODEGAS in Ribera del Duero are in Spanish; to tour in English,
         it’s important to make an appointment in advance. (Note that it’s difficult to arrange a
         tour of Vega-Sicilia or Pesquera unless you have business with those bodegas; both
         are closed to the public.)
         ALL OVER RIBERA DEL DUERO are little asadores—simple, tavernlike roast houses
         where roast baby lamb and roast suckling pig are not only specialties but are often the
         only things (besides a country salad) on the menu. You can’t make reservations at such
         places… you just walk in. Any bodega will have a list of their favorites, so ask for
         recommendations.
                The Ribera del Duero Wines to Know
Ribera del Duero is old, masculine Spain. If you close your eyes for a moment when you are there, you could be
back in the sixteenth century: conquistadores; fortresses; walled cities. Today the wines bring us back, for the
region’s intense climate means that only earthy, powerful reds are made.




                                   ALEJANDRO FERNÁNDEZ PESQUERA

                                                    RESERVA
                                                  100% tinto fino
Alejandro Fernández likes bold, masculine wines with lots of personality—a sure description of Pesquera Reserva.
The wine explodes onto the palate with incredible blueberry and violet flavors, only to be replaced seconds later by
a surge of bitter chocolate and espresso. As with all of the top Ribera del Dueros, there’s a sexy sense of dirt and
darkness here, and a long mineral-streaked finish.
                                                 O. FOURNIER

                                                  ALFA SPIGA
                                                 100% tinto fino
Alfa Spiga is a powerhouse—a rugged, meaty, dark wine that seems to embody Ribera del Duero’s massive,
gnarled vines themselves. The first to pull you in are the anything-but-dainty aromas—peat bog, coffee grounds,
Scotch, wet bark. From there, the wine swallows you in a wave of intense black fruit flavor. It is massively
structured, with a huge thrust of tannin—all the more reminder that Ribera del Duero wines can seem unyielding
until you bring out the roast lamb.




                                             DOMINIO DE PINGUS

                                                 100% tinto fino
Few wines broach the sheer power of this one. Pingus is, in a word, monolithic. When it’s young, a curtain of
tannin and oak often shroud the wine’s beautiful core of complex, deep, cherry-laced fruit. But with time, the power
and heaviness lift and notes of tobacco, leather, and minerals begin to emerge, giving the wine a more nuanced
character, and allowing it to achieve a sense of harmony. Pingus is not for the faint of heart. Nor for those who
require immediate gratification. That wine would be Flor de Pingus, theoretically Pingus’s baby sister, but a wild
tempest of a wine with amazing purity and vividness, a deep, concentrated core of fruit, and the hedonic texture of
crushed velvet.
                                               PÉREZ PASCUAS

                                         VIÑA PEDROSA | RESERVA
                                                 100% tinto fino
Viña Pedrosa has always been a signature wine of Ribera del Duero. It’s not as thick and Portlike as many of its
brothers here, but it is a wonderfully sensual, harmonious wine packed with all those aromas and flavors that sound
bad, yet taste really good (animal fur, manure, sweat, worn leather, gaminess). The first time I had this wine in
Spain, I was eating a long-simmered, savory meat stew, and the two will always be entwined in my memory.




                                             ABADIA RETUERTA

                                 SARDÓN DE DUERO | PAGO NEGRALADA
                                                100% tempranillo
Although technically just outside the region, Abadía Retuerta is nonetheless usually thought of as a bodega in
Ribera del Duero—and not just any bodega, but one of the largest, most elaborate and expensive. The 500-acre
(200-hectare) estate includes the twelfth century abadía (abbey) Santa Maria de Retuerta and now holds a luxury
hotel plus a state-of-the-art winery. Famous Bordeaux winemaker Pascal Delbeck, who also makes the wines at
Château Ausone, is the winemaker. Pago Negralada, the bodega’s top wine, is utterly hedonistic and silky, packed
with the aromas and flavors of cocoa, licorice, strawberries, dried figs, leather, and sweet pipe tobacco.
                                                 VEGA-SICILIA

                                                      UNICO
                         Mostly tinto fino with a small amount of cabernet sauvignon
It has been said of Unico that the more masculine vintages have the structure and depth of great Bordeaux and the
more feminine vintages have the elegance and perfume of great Burgundy. Indeed, year after year, Vega-Sicilia
produces exquisite wines with immaculate balance—wines that possess both finesse and raw power. Among the
bodega’s wines, Unico, from the estate’s oldest vines, has a special appeal. A few years ago, in a vertical tasting
going back to 1948, I was so stunned by the aliveness of the wines that I had the rather strange, out-of-body feeling
that I was not drinking the wine—it was drinking me.
JEREZ
THE SHERRY REGION

The three words Jerez, Xérès, and Sherry that appear on every bottle of Sherry are a
reflection of the diverse names for Spain’s most spellbinding and fascinating fortified
wine. Sherry is the English word, and Xérès the original Phoenician one, for the wines
made in the Spanish wine region of Jerez. But no matter what you call it, if there were
justice in the wine cosmos, Sherry would be one of the world’s best-loved and oft-sipped
wines. As it stands, Sherry—the unsung hero of five great wine classics (Sherry, Port,
Madeira, Champagne, and Tokaji)—is largely misunderstood and underappreciated (at
least in our time). That it is sometimes cast as the libation of little old ladies is nothing if
not amusing. Sherry, after all, is the daily drink of southern Spanish men—known for their
machismo, love of bullfights, and prowess at horse racing, not to mention their
predilection for bars and cigars.
   As a fortified wine, Sherry’s alcoholic strength has been raised to between 15 and 22
percent. (A standard table wine is usually 12 to 15 percent alcohol.) In addition to being
fortified, Sherries are also given slow, careful, and systematic exposure to oxygen—the
degree of which varies depending on the style of Sherry being made. But fortification and
controlled oxidation do not begin to tell the whole hauntingly delicious and complex story
of Sherry. No other wine in the world lights up the senses and the brain in the same way.
Indeed, nowhere else in the world are so many radically different styles of wine made
from the same grape variety. Much more on this to come.




                   Drying Pedro Ximénez grapes in the brilliant sunlight of Sherry country.
   Although vineyards and beaches would seem to make strange bedfellows, Sherry
comes from a small wedge of land along the sea in southwest Spain, in the province of
Andalusia. This is the Spain of a 1960s movie—a land of gypsies and heel-pounding
flamenco dancers, guitars and prized horses, whitewashed villages, and perhaps the
world’s most mouthwatering array of shellfish. It was from these stark, chalky-white
shores that Columbus began his westward sail. If he brought wine with him (and history
suggests he did), Sherry was the first European wine drunk in America.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Sherry comes from an eerie, barren moonscape of blinding whiteness along Spain’s
southwestern Andalusian coast. The vineyards spread in triangular fashion from an inland
point north of the charming town of Jerez de la Frontera to the small maritime towns of
Puerto de Santa María, on the Bay of Cádiz, and Sanlúcar de Barrameda, on the Atlantic
shore at the mouth of the Guadalquivir River.
   The best vineyards lie in the heart of this triangle, a region designated as Jerez Superior
by Sherry’s Consejo Regulador, or governing body. Sherry’s Consejo—legally constituted
in 1935—was the first in Spain, and Sherry was the first DO, awarded that designation
two years earlier, in 1933, by the national government. Within the Jerez Superior region,
the vineyards of highest regard roll like waves over gentle hillocks. Looking at them, I am
always reminded of the rippling landscape of the ocean floor. On these beautifully smooth
and curved hills, the verdant vines glisten like emeralds in the glaring summer sun.
   Millennia ago, the Sherry region was covered by a vast sea. Thus, not surprisingly
today, the best soil type—usually found on the tops of the hillocks—is composed of the
remnants of marine sediments mixed with chalky calcium carbonates (including
limestone) and prehistoric sea fossils. Called albariza, the soil is stark white, crumbly,
light as cake mix, and has very good water-holding capacity. The latter helps the vines
endure southern Spain’s long, often drought-ridden summers. In addition, since albariza
soils tend to be the highest in elevation, vines planted in albariza tend to catch sea breezes
—a boon for preserving acidity in the grapes. Less prized than albariza is arena, sand,
often right beside the coast, and barro, a low-lying, brownish, more fertile clay where,
today, mostly sugar beets and corn are planted.

                             THE QUICK SIP ON SHERRY
         AS CHAMPAGNE is in France or Port is in Portugal, Sherry is Spain’s most complex
         and labor-intensive wine. The immense difficulty of producing this handcrafted wine has
         earned it its reputation as one of the world’s most spellbinding wines.
         SHERRY IS MADE in multiple styles. These range from hauntingly bonedry to
         gorgeously sweet.
         SHERRY COUNTRY is also one of Spain’s most thrilling food regions and the place
         where the small dishes known as tapas were first created. Sherry is their quintessential
         accompaniment.
                                 THE GRAPES OF SHERRY
 Jerez is planted exclusively with white grape varieties.
 MOSCATEL: Today, a relatively rare grape made into a wine on its own and used as a sweet blending
 wine.
 PALOMINO: More correctly known as Palomino fino. Major grape for all styles of Sherry.
 PEDRO XIMÉNEZ: A rare grape, picked and dried on mats in the sun to make the sensational dessert
 Sherry also called Pedro Ximénez.


   The most widely planted grape in Jerez is Palomino fino (known simply as Palomino);
95 percent of Sherry is made from it. The name Palomino refers not to horses (as might be
expected) but to Fernán Yáñez Palomino, a thirteenth-century knight to King Alfonso X.
One of the least acidic grapes in the world, Palomino is also extremely high-yielding.
Growers can easily reap the legal limit of 8,476 pounds per acre (9,500 kilos per hectare).
Even the bunches themselves are huge; a cluster of Palomino is equal in size to four or
five bunches of Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon.
   In terms of aroma, flavor, and character, Palomino won’t turn any heads. As it happens,
however, that very neutrality is sought. With a relatively simple grape as a blank canvas, a
Sherry’s individuality comes from the albariza soil in which its grapes are grown and the
solera in which it is made. (More on the solera concept in a moment.)
   Finally, completing the grape list, there are two other grapes—both white—found in
Jerez. Both account for less and less acreage as time goes on, but both can make stunning
wines. The first, moscatel bianco (muscat of Alexandria), is used to make a sweet wine for
blending and, occasionally, a fantastic dessert wine on its own. Second, Pedro Ximénez
(PEY-dro he-MEN-ez), or “PX,” as it is known, is a local Andalusian variety used to make
the style of sweet Sherry called Pedro Ximénez. This is a wine that any card-carrying wine
lover must try, for it is one of the most sensual wine experiences to be had. A glass of PX
looks, for all the world, like a glass of molasses, and the wine—dense, syrupy, and dark
mahogany in color—is the very epitome of artisanal creativity, opulence, and refined
sweetness (at 44 percent, 440 grams per liter, residual sugar!).

                             HOW SHERRY GOT ITS NAME
    The name Sherry has a long pedigree. The Greeks called the region Xera, the Romans, Ceret. By the
    early Middle Ages the Arabs called the region Sekeris, and northern Spanish Castilians called it Xérès,
    and later Xérèz. By the late nineteenth century, Xérèz had become Jerez, and the town that marked the
    frontier between the Arabs and the northern Spanish was called Jerez de la Frontera. The Spanish
    pronunciation of Jerez (hare-ETH) was corrupted by British importers of the wine, who pronounced it
    JER-rez, then JER-ee, and finally Sherry.
                                               TAPAS
No food is more associated with Sherry—and with southern Spain—than tapas. The little nibbles are
thought to have originated in Andalusian bars in the late nineteenth century. Originally complimentary,
they were served in the late morning, after breakfast coffee, but before lunch. Each nibble would be
served on a small saucer, which would be placed atop one’s mid-morning glass of Sherry, conveniently
keeping the flies out. As the custom evolved, bar owners found tapas were a way to entice their patrons
to stay longer and eat and drink more. And so they would; lunch after all, at least in this part of Spain,
isn’t usually served until 3:00 P.M.—a long time to wait for sustenance. The word tapas is derived from
the verb tapar, which translates as “to cover.” Today, tapas are rarely on the house, and the thousands of
types range from simple to elaborate, with each small southern Spanish village claiming its own tapas
specialty.
                           HOW SHERRY IS MADE

Before I go into the specific winemaking processes by which Sherry is made and aged, it’s
important to know that Sherry is not a single entity, but rather seven distinct styles of
wine, each of which is extremely individual. At one end of the spectrum are the
manzanillas and finos, with their tangy, crisp, green earthiness; in the middle are the
amontillados, palo cortados, and olorosos, with their lusty, roasted, nutty flavors; and
finally come the creams, with their sweet, lush toffee, and fig flavors. None of these
Sherry flavors, textures, and aromas ever quite falls into what we might think of as the
galaxy of white or red wine. The flavor of Sherry is a world unto itself.
   This is because of the unique way in which Sherry is progressively blended and aged in
a complex network of old barrels, called a solera. Depending on how and the rate at which
the wine moves through the solera, the different styles of Sherry can be made.

HOW THE SOLERA WORKS
The first important fact to know is that each style of Sherry has its own separate solera.
What is a solera and how does the solera system work? The process, at its most simplistic,
goes like this: Palomino grapes are picked early (often in August) when the grapes are just
ripe (about 12 percent alcohol, potentially), but not overripe. They are then crushed, and
the juice is fermented—usually in stainless-steel tanks—very much the way any other
white wine might be made. At this point the wine is lightly fortified with grape spirits
(fino will be fortified just a little; the fuller styles, like oloroso, will be fortified slightly
more).
   The fortified wine is then poured into barrels and set aside for six months to a year to
develop a bit of initial complexity. This initial period in the wine’s life is called the
sobretable. When it is finished, the wine will enter the solera, where it will be
progressively blended and aged until it eventually emerges as Sherry.
   To form the solera, multiple rows of old 600-liter (160-gallon) American oak barrels,
called botas, are lined up. Often these rows are stacked one row on top of the other, like
children’s building blocks. Generally the stack will be four or five rows of barrels high,
but the solera may contain as many as fourteen rows of barrels. (In the case of fourteen
rows, the barrels would not all be stacked one on top of the other, or the bottom barrels
would burst from the weight.) Even at five barrels high, a solera is an impressive sight.
    The barrels on the bottom row contain the oldest Sherry; from these barrels small
amounts (known as the saca) will be drawn off and bottled when the Sherry is deemed
ready—and usually only when an order is placed. This row is also called the solera row
(from suelo, Spanish for “floor”). Each time Sherry is drawn off from the bottom row,
bottled, and sent to market, the barrel is replenished with an equal quantity of wine from a
barrel in the row above it. That row, second from the bottom, is called criadera #1, or the
first nursery. It contains the second-oldest wine. When wine from criadera #1 is drawn
off, it, in turn, is replenished with wine from a barrel in the row above it, called criadera
#2. Criadera #2 will be replenished with wine from the row above it, criadera #3, and so
on. Thus, a tiny amount of wine is slowly, constantly being drawn off and added to older
wine, moving progressively down through lower and lower barrels. (Some styles of Sherry
are moved more slowly through the solera than others—a key factor in their final flavors.)
At the very top, the solera is fed with the wine of the current year after it has undergone
the initial sobretable period. The process of moving the wines from one criadera to the
next has a lovely name—rocios. The word means “morning dew” and is a reflection of
how gently the wine must be handled when it is moved between criaderas.




   Each bottle of Sherry is thus a complex molecular kaleidoscope of what can only be an
estimated age. As a result of this constant fractional blending of younger wines into older
wines, Sherry is not the product of any one year. By law, it never carries a vintage date,
although it is not uncommon for a Sherry label to designate the year the solera was
formed. Also by law, only 30 percent of a solera can be drawn off for bottling each year.
                                    MONTILLA-MORILES
East and north of Jerez is the wine region Montilla-Moriles, near the old Moorish capital, Córdoba. Here,
under the blazing summer sun, Pedro Ximénez grapes achieve such sugar-loaded ripeness that they
easily result in wines that are 15.5 percent alcohol naturally, before (optional) fortification. Montillas are
not technically Sherries, but like them, they develop flor, are aged in a solera, and are made in such
similar styles as fino, amontillado, and so forth. Unlike Sherry, however, the naturally higher alcohol
means that Montilla wines often do not have to be fortified with grape spirits. Even today, some Montillas
are still fermented in tall clay vessels called tinajas.
   The best producers of Montilla are the legendary bodegas Alvear, established in 1729, and Toro
Albalá, founded in 1844. In particular, Alvear’s fino seems to embody the intense and vibrant pulse of
southern Spain, with its bursting flavors of lemon, chalk, olives, pepper, spices, almond cake, and
roasted nuts. As for Toro Albalá’s Pedro Ximénez, the English language does not possess sufficient
descriptors. The black, oozy wine is one of the most surreal, luscious experiences any taster could ever
have.
                       BARRELS—BLACK AND BROODING
 Walking out of the crack-lingly bright outdoor sunlight of southern Spain into the shadowy, dark interior of
 a Sherry bodega is an awesome experience. Often called cathedrals because of their unreal stillness
 and impressive size, Sherry bodegas are filled with large, imposing black barrels that sit like silent bulls
 in the dim light. A typical bodega might have a hundred thousand such casks (known as botas, or butts).
 Made from American oak, each is about three times the size of a standard Bordeaux barrel, and holds
 about 160 gallons (600 liters) of wine.
    The barrels are always painted with a water-based, jet-black matte paint, giving them a powerful,
 dramatic appearance. And why black? The answers most commonly given in Jerez are that: 1) the black
 paint discourages insects from nibbling on the wood, 2) the black paint keeps the sun from penetrating
 the wood and spoiling the wine, 3) because barrels are never thrown away in Jerez (many of those
 currently in use are 150 to 200 years old), they often look ragtag from years of being repaired; painting
 hides imperfections and makes the barrels look neat and uniform, and 4) any leakage could be easily
 detected because it would appear shiny against the matte black paint.

   The labyrinthine solera process is especially remarkable because it is impossible to
determine just how old a Sherry is when it finally emerges from the bottom row. The
reason is twofold. First, once the solera is set up, the barrels are never completely emptied.
Currently, Sherry barrels are, on average, one hundred years old, and many bodegas have
barrels that average two hundred years old. Second, the small amount of wine drawn off
and added to the wine in the barrel below is not stirred into that wine. The wine is
therefore not fully homogenized. Each barrel will contain molecules of wine that were
never drawn off, and thus date from when the solera was begun, as much as two centuries
earlier.
   For Sherry to become Sherry requires more than simply the physical movement of wine
through a solera, however. Why does fino become fino and oloroso become oloroso? That
metamorphosis is fairly well understood today. For most of history, however, Sherry was
inexplicably supernatural.

MAKING FINO AND MANZANILLA—THE MAGIC OF FLOR
Each style of Sherry is ineluctably tied to the presence or absence of flor—a foamy, waxy
film of yellow-white yeasts that appears on the surface of some styles of Sherry. (The
word flor means “flower”—a reference to its ability to bloom.) To understand flor, let’s
imagine the winemaker is making a fino. First, he crushes, but does not press, the
Palomino grapes. The free-run juice is then fermented and, after fermentation, fortified
only slightly with spirits. The wine is transferred into a Sherry bota, but instead of being
filled to the top, the bota is filled only three-fourths full. Sherry makers call this space dos
puntos—two fists (of air).
   Next, a remarkable occurrence takes place. A film of flor appears on the surface of the
wine. As they accumulate and grow, the yeasts form small curds. In a month’s time, the
flor will blanket the wine.
   A century ago, horrified by the foul-looking flor, Sherry makers believed that certain
barrels of wine simply got “sick.” Slowly, opinion changed. The flor-covered wines, they
noticed, emerged from the solera light, fresh, and very dry. This came to be seen as a
blessing, for such a wine was, in fact, well suited to the sultry local climate. Enologists
now know that flor is a family of four complex, wild strains of Saccharomyces yeasts (the
leading one of which is called Saccharomyces beticus) that bloom spontaneously in Jerez’s
humid air.
Flor—specific strains of wild yeasts that thrive in Jerez—float on the surface of wine, ultimately contributing to Sherry’s
                                                       unique flavor.

    Importantly, these yeasts have the metabolic capacity to consume alcohol and oxygen
(rather than sugar). Indeed, the need for oxygen is in part why these strains of yeast
evolved to float; by floating on the surface of a wine, they’d be closer to the air in the
barrel. (The yeasts’ need for oxygen is also why Sherry bodegas have famously large
windows that are always open, and why most bodegas are situated facing the ocean to
maximize sea breezes.) As they proliferate, the strains of flor yeasts also give off
acetaldehyde, the aroma of which is a signature scent in certain styles of Sherry. Although
it sounds awful, the smell of acetaldehyde is often compared to nail polish remover.
Somehow, however, that aroma—when it emanates from Sherry—comes across in a
singularly appealing way.
   Interestingly, flor taken from Jerez to other parts of the world quickly mutates or dies,
conveniently ensuring that true Sherry will never be made in California, Chile, Italy, or
even anywhere else in Spain.
   Flor is critical to a fino-to-be. Floating on the wine thanks to their waxy cells, the flor
yeasts protect the developing fino from oxidizing by consuming the surrounding oxygen
(remember, the barrel contents are one-quarter air). With fino, the flor ebbs and flows
cyclically with the seasons. Thus, flor’s shield is not absolutely impermeable. A small
amount of oxidation will occur with fino—just enough to impart further complexity.
    Flor is also critical to manzanilla. In the especially humid conditions under which
manzanilla is made, flor will blanket the developing wine throughout the year. The result
is a wine of finely etched delicacy that has the least possible exposure to oxidation. How is
it that manzanilla is made in a significantly more humid environment than other Sherries
when the entire Jerez region is humid? Manzanilla is, by law, only made by bodegas
situated along the beach in the seaside town of Sanlúcar de Barrameda, where the salty air
and average 78 percent humidity create a unique mesoclimate. So dependent is manzanilla
on this oceanic mesoclimate that developing manzanillas taken to another bodega in the
Sherry region (or even a bodega too far from the wet breezes off the beach) will turn into
finos!
   As for amontillados, they are made by taking fino Sherries, fortifying them a bit more
to a higher alcohol content, and then putting them through another solera where they will
not be protected by flor. The amontillado that results is darker in color (thanks to the air
exposure), aged, nutty, and rich—and it has more alcohol than a fino.

MAKING OLOROSO, CREAM SHERRY, AND PEDRO XIMÉNEZ
Until quite recently, the mystical and unpredictable appearance of flor told Sherry makers
whether they had emerging finos or manzanillas on their hands. If flor did not form in the
botas, the Sherry makers knew the wines were destined to become olorosos and they
would care for and age them accordingly.
   Today an oloroso is usually made intentionally. Instead of using free-run juice and
fortifying it only slightly, Sherry makers lightly press some of the juice from the grapes
and fortify it enough so that flor is not able to form. (Flor yeasts, like all yeasts, die in an
environment that is greater than about 16.4 percent alcohol.) The extra bit of alcohol and
tannin from the grape skins means that an oloroso will always have a rounder, fuller
texture than the lighter, more elegant fino or manzanilla.
                           THE SEVEN STYLES OF SHERRY
Sherry falls along a spectrum of styles—from those (such as manzanilla and fino) that look like white
wine and are light, dry, and crisp; to Sherries (such as palo cortado and oloroso) that are topaz to
mahogany in color, fuller-bodied, and outrageously nutty. There are seven major styles.

                                            MANZANILLA
A highly revered, light, elegant style of Sherry, manzanilla, by law, comes only from the tiny seaside town
of Sanlúcar de Barrameda. There, the wet ocean air gives manzanilla a dry, salty tang as well as an
iodine-like sea spray aroma, similar to the aroma of a freshly shucked oyster. Manzanilla has a delicate,
crisp edge, and its flavors are often said to suggest chamomile, a plant that grows around Sanlúcar in the
seaside marshes. (The name manzanilla translates as “chamomile.”) Manzanilla is entirely dependent on
the bloom of flor, the yellow foam of yeasts that forms on the surface of the wine as it develops. It is the
presence of and exposure to flor (rather than long exposure to oxygen) that gives manzanilla its
character. Because manzanillas are ultra-fragile, most bodegas bottle and ship them to order. They must
be drunk chilled and fresh; opened bottles last no more than one or two days. Manzanillas are between
15 and 17 percent alcohol.

                                                    FINO
Fino is Sherry at the apex of refinement and complexity. Fino is pale in color and low in alcohol (for
Sherry). Its unforgettable dry tang and aroma, reminiscent of a mossy garden after a rain, plus its
pungent yeasty/almondy aroma, make it one of the world’s great seafood wines. Like manzanillas, finos
take their character from the presence of flor, not from extended oxidative aging. And although they are
not quite as delicate as manzanillas, finos are still fragile and must be served well-chilled and at peak
freshness. An open bottle should be drunk, like most white wines, within two to three days. Finos fall
between 15 and 17 percent alcohol.

                                          AMONTILLADO
Whereas mazanillas and finos take their character from flor and not from extended aging in the presence
of oxygen, amontillados are the result of both flor and extended oxidative aging. They are a beautiful
topaz/amber color. An amontillado starts out more or less as a fino. Then, after four to six years moving
through its fino solera, the wine is fortified so that its alcohol content is slightly higher than that of
manzanilla or fino. At this point, it is put into another solera where it will no longer be protected by flor. As
a result, it will oxidize, taking on its classic topaz/amber color as well as rich, complex roasted hazelnut,
fresh black tobacco, dried fruit, and spicy flavors, and a smooth, almost satiny texture—all in addition to
the pungent character it already possessed by virtue of starting out in the presence of flor. For many
people, this makes amontillado the perfect Sherry style. Some producers make bone-dry amontillados;
others blend in a small percentage of sweet Pedro Ximénez to make a medium-dry wine. The label may
or may not indicate the level of sweetness. Amontillados tend to fall between 16 and 22 percent alcohol.

                                         PALO CORTADO
A rare, eccentric, and exceptionally profound and complex type of Sherry, palo cortado has a burnished
mahogany color, sometimes with an unreal green glint at the edge of the wine. It is still something of a
mystery, and even bodega owners don’t always define palo cortados exactly the same way. The
consensus, however, is this: Sometimes, what at first appears to be an oloroso develops in a manner
that is more elegant and complex than oloroso typically is. Known henceforth as a palo cortado, the wine
soars with aromas and flavors suggestive of roasted walnuts, dried leaves, fresh tobacco, animal fur, and
exotic spices, and an almost primordially lush texture. The latter is the result of the wine’s high level of
glycerin, which gives it a sappy, silky, oozy texture. At the same time, palo cortados manifest the dry,
slightly pungent aroma of amontillados and show a lactic (buttery) character (the possible result of a
small amount of malolactic fermentation). This duplicitous curiosity, with the fragrance and finesse of a
dry amontillado and a voluptuousness reminiscent of a dry oloroso, is quite simply an otherworldly
experience to drink. Among Sherry connoisseurs, palo cortado is considered the apex of sophisticated
drinking. The alcohol level of this style falls between 17 percent and 22 percent.
                                              OLOROSO
 The word oloroso means “intensely aromatic” in Spanish, and this style is indeed that. Olorosos are long-
 aged Sherries that have not been protected or influenced by flor. More than any other type of dry Sherry,
 olorosos are exposed to oxygen. This darkens the wine to a rich, deep mahogany and imparts a flavor
 ten orders of magnitude more nutty than nuts themselves. Olorosos are potent and full-bodied and have
 an unctuous feel on the palate—the result of their high level of glycerin. The initial raw material for an
 oloroso is usually pressed juice, which is slightly bolder than the free-run juice used to make fino. The
 wine is also more heavily fortified with grape spirits (18 to 20 percent) before it enters the oloroso solera
 and is moved more slowly through it. As a result, olorosos are meatier, denser Sherries. Classically,
 olorosos are hauntingly dry wines, but some producers today mellow the dry finish by blending in tiny
 amounts of Pedro Ximénez.

                                                 CREAM
 Originally created for the British export market, mahogany-colored cream Sherries are made by
 sweetening oloroso—generally to at least 11 percent residual sugar (some cream Sherries are
 considerably sweeter). Cream Sherries range all over the board in quality—from inexpensive, mud-thick,
 saccharine quaffs to elegant, almost racy wines redolent of chocolate, licorice, figs, dried fruits, and
 roasted nuts. A vibrant and delicious Spanish cocktail calls for mixing good cream Sherry with Campari
 and red vermouth and then serving it over ice with a twist of lemon. Cream Sherries range from 15.5 to
 22 percent alcohol. There’s also a “white” version of cream Sherry. Known as a pale cream, it’s a simple,
 sweet Sherry with less alcohol than regular cream Sherry.

                                        PEDRO XIMÉNEZ
 An ebony-colored sweet Sherry, Pedro Ximénez is often as dark and syrupy as blackstrap molasses.
 Unlike the vast majority of other Sherries, which are made from the Palomino grape, Pedro Ximénez is
 made from white Pedro Ximénez grapes (it continues to astound me that so black a wine can be made
 from white grapes!). The grapes achieve their sugary concentration by being dried on straw mats in the
 intense Spanish sun for about a week. (The mats are covered at night, so the grapes are spared from the
 morning dew.) Once made and aged in a solera, the wine will be 40 to 50 percent residual sugar—more
 than three times the sweetness of Sauternes, for example. Pedro Ximénez is served on its own as
 dessert, or with hard cheeses and membrillo (quince paste). As mentioned, small amounts of it are also
 used to sweeten other styles of Sherry. However, for a thorough dive into the deep end of hedonism, you
 can also do what the Spaniards do and employ it as an adult sundae topping, by pouring it over vanilla or
 rum raisin ice cream.

   A Sherry maker moves the developing oloroso through its solera more slowly than fino
or manzanilla go through theirs. By holding the oloroso longer in the solera, the Sherry
maker allows it to take on a deep, carameltoffee richness.
    When the oloroso is removed from the solera, it is ready to be bottled as a dry wine. Or
it may be lightly sweetened with a bit of ultra-sweet juice from Pedro Ximénez grapes,
making it an off-dry oloroso. If the oloroso is sweetened to the extent that Pedro Ximénez
makes up about 15 percent of the final blend, the oloroso becomes a cream Sherry.
   The first cream Sherries were made at the turn of the twentieth century for the British
export market. They were lush, warming wines perfectly suited to bitter, raw English
winters. Such was the popularity of cream Sherries that shortcuts were sometimes taken to
meet the demand for them and to make cheap versions. Today, the cheap cream Sherries
on the market are little more than dull base wines that have been quickly passed through a
few barrels, and then so heavily sweetened that they have virtually no character or
complexity. But the best cream Sherries—like Lustau’s East India Cream Sherry—are
phenomenally hedonistic wines of profound richness and complexity.
                                THE THRILL OF THE CHILL
 Sherry tastes best when it’s drunk the way it is in Spanish bodegas—cold for certain styles; chilled for others.
 Manzanilla and fino, for example, should be served very cold (like Champagne). Nutty amontillado should be
 served well chilled. And even the deepest-colored Sherries—palo cortado, oloroso, cream, and Pedro Ximénez—
 taste best served at cool room temperature. Ice cubes aren’t out of the question. In the south of Spain, one of the
 most refreshing and ubiquitous cocktails is cream Sherry served over ice with a twist of orange.




 Black botas of Pedro Ximénez at Bodegas Tradicion. The bodega focuses exclusively on rare, old Sherries designated
                                                 VOS or VORS.

   As we’ve seen in The Seven Styles of Sherry (page 462), Pedro Ximénez is made into a
rare Sherry of its own. Most Pedro Ximénez wines are nearly black in color and have a
texture thicker than maple syrup. A thimbleful is more than dessert wine, it’s dessert. To
achieve this degree of sweetness and intensity, the grapes are picked and then laid out
under the scorching sun for two to three weeks to dry and shrivel. Only when the sugar in
them becomes very concentrated are the grapes slowly fermented into wine that will
possess more than 40 percent (400 grams per liter) residual sugar.
                         SOME OF THE BEST SHERRY PRODUCERS
  Barbadillo • Bodegas Tradición • Emilio Lustau • González Byass • Hidalgo • Osborne • Pedro Domecq •
                              Sandeman • Valdespino • Williams & Humbert
              THE ARABIC THREADS OF SHERRY HISTORY
For almost eight hundred years during the Middle Ages, while the rest of Europe was shrouded in cultural
and intellectual darkness, the Moors controlled most of Spain. Progressive, powerful, and enlightened,
they were not one people but a group of Middle Eastern and North African Muslim tribes that entered
Europe through Andalusia. Their capital became the white-walled village of Córdoba, which under their
caliphate became the most important city in Western Europe. By the tenth century, Córdoba had half a
million people and was the first city in Europe with street lighting, a sewage system, and public fountains.
There were fifty hospitals, three hundred public baths, sixty schools, twenty libraries, and more than a
thousand mosques. Despite brief waves of religious fanaticism, the caliphate of Córdoba was remarkably
secular. For centuries, Muslims, Christians, and Jews lived in harmony under its rule. Such was the
atmosphere of liberalness, openmindedness, and tolerance, in fact, that the Muslims largely ignored the
Koranic prohibition against drinking. By the end of Arabic hegemony, Sherry was a well-established
beverage—one that scholars believe was decidedly present at the caliph’s table.
                        OLD AND RARE SHERRIES

As I’ve explained, traditionally, no style of Sherry has ever been vintage dated. That’s
because Sherry becomes Sherry by virtue of its slow movement through a solera (and
some styles, as I’ve said, move more slowly than others). Since there’s no way to know
how long any molecule spends in any one barrel within the solera, the exact age of a
Sherry remains a mystery. However, in 2000, Jerez’s Consejo Regulador instituted legal
age designations for four styles of Sherry—amontillado, oloroso, palo cortado, and Pedro
Ximénez. (The regulations don’t apply to manzanilla or fino because those styles move
comparatively quickly through their soleras.) The designations are VOS and VORS. To
achieve either of these designations, the wine must go through extensive sensory analysis
and be carbon-14 dated!
   VOS—Latin for Vinum Optimum Signatum, or Very Old Sherry—can be used on the
label of a Sherry that went through a solera that’s at least twenty years old, so the youngest
possible molecule in the resulting Sherry is also at least twenty years old.
   VORS—Latin for Vinum Optimum Rare Signatum, or Very Old Rare Sherry—can be
used on the label of a Sherry that went through a solera that’s at least thirty years old and
thus the wine itself is at least thirty years old. In fact, many prized Sherries are far older
than these designations suggest because they date from the time the individual solera for
that wine was set up—sometimes as much as one hundred years ago.
                  THE IMPORTANCE OF FRESHNESS

For manzanilla and fino—the two light-colored styles of Sherry that experience flor—
freshness is critical. Alas, in some restaurants and bars outside of Spain, it is not
uncommon to be served from a bottle that has been open for months, and as a result has an
almost rancid flavor.
   In Jerez, an opened bottle of fino or manzanilla is served well chilled and kept no
longer than a single day. More typically, the bottle is finished with the meal, which is why
in Spain both types of Sherry are most often sold in half-bottles. By comparison,
amontillados, olorosos, palo cortados, and creams (all served at cool room temperature)
will last several months after the bottle has been opened, with only a slight diminution of
flavor. Immediate consumption is not as critical with these Sherries because they are less
fragile and slightly more oxidized to begin with. If they contain some Pedro Ximénez,
their sugar content will also act as a preservative.
   Freshness is not, however, solely a question of how long you keep an open bottle. Both
fino and manzanilla begin to lose their zesty character six months after they leave the
solera. Clearly, this presents a problem. Since Sherry, by law, cannot carry a bottled-on or
drink-by date, there is no way of knowing whether any given bottle has been on the wine
shop shelf ten weeks or ten months. The solution is to buy only top Sherries and only from
the wine shops that are known to do a fairly good trade in Sherry and thus turn over their
stock often.

                                    SERRANO OR SHRIMP?
    In Jerez, there is not a more traditional pairing than a glass of bone-dry fino along with a small plate of
    thinly sliced serrano ham or, better yet, jamón de Jabugo. It’s an unbeatable match. Until you consider
    gambas al ajillo (garlic shrimp) and a glass of manzanilla, which together just might constitute the single
    most satisfying appetizer/aperitif combination in the world. The salty, briny, olive-scented tang of a great
    manzanilla is the perfect dramatic counterpoint to fresh shrimp that have been quickly sautéed in a pool
    of ripe olive oil with a sprinkle of dried red chile and more garlic than you want to know.
                         THE FOODS OF SHERRY

Andalusia’s pulsating drama of bullfights and flamenco, of cathedrals and mosques, of
fino and fiestas, whispers the promise of good things to eat. This is, first and foremost, the
home of a huge, sensual, movable feast of seafood. Not the sort that is neat and tidy,
either. No, this is the roll-up-your-sleeves, peel-crack-and-pull-apart, eat-the-heads, eat-
the-tails, slurp-the-juice, lick-your-fingers sort of seafood eating.
   The love affair with gutsy seafood occurs throughout the region, but it is especially
poignant in the seaside towns of Sanlúcar de Barrameda and Puerto de Santa María, where
the heady aroma of the ocean air puts everyone in the mood to eat fish. Sanlúcar is best
experienced first around twilight, when the approach of evening brings cool air and the
light over the sea fades to silver. The thing to do is eat platters of langoustines and drink
Sanlúcar’s famous manzanilla at a bar, such as Casa Bigote on the Bajo de Guía beach.
            ONE AWFUL; THE OTHER, AWESOME—COOKING
                 “SHERRY” AND SHERRY VINEGAR
 So-called cooking “sherry”—the kind found in every supermarket in the United States—is not true Sherry
 but rather cheap base wine that has been salted and then doctored to give it a baked, caramel flavor.
 Wretched stuff, it does nothing for the flavor of a dish but it does, sadly, tarnish the image of Sherry.
    Sherry vinegar is a whole other story. Expensive and exquisite, the best Sherry vinegars (like the best
 balsamic vinegars) possess a complex, nutty, spicy, sweet flavor. With Sherry vinegar, this is the result of
 having been made from Sherries painstakingly aged and concentrated in old soleras. Sherry vinegar
 even has its own Spanish Denominación de Origen (DO) and must be made in the Jerez region of Spain.
 Really good Sherry vinegar is labeled Reserva and must be aged at least two years. But the elixir to
 absolutely get your hands on is called Gran Reserva Pedro Ximénez Sherry Vinegar. Aged at least ten
 years and dark mahogany in color, these gran reserva vinegars have such an otherworldly taste and
 velvety texture, they themselves are like drinking great old wine.

   Later, go to Puerto de Santa María, where fishermen’s bars, open-air cafés/markets, and
tascas (taverns) are strung together as tightly as pearls along the waterfront roads of
Ribera del Marisco and Ribero del Río. The idea is to stroll from place to place, drinking
icy, fresh fino and eating a different assortment of fish at each: langostinos, gambas, and
cigalas (spiny lobsters, prawns, and crayfish, respectively); then boquerones (fried fresh
baby anchovies) and percebes (grotesque-looking gooseneck barnacles that are
remarkably delicious and virtually worshipped by Spanish seafood lovers); next, merluza
(ocean-sweet hake that is dipped in semolina flour and fried) and baby salmonetes (red
mullet); then calamares rellenos (stuffed squid with fresh mayonnaise); and, if you are
lucky, angulas (baby white eels, no longer than a matchstick, sautéed for mere seconds in
sizzling, garlic-strewn olive oil).
   Between bites of seafood and sips of Sherry, you nibble spicy green olives that have
been gently cracked and then marinated in freshly pressed olive oil, garlic, and Sherry
vinegar.
    Jerezanos begin their nightly culinary pilgrimage through the taverns around 10:00 P.M.,
and by midnight the seafood-and-Sherry feast is in full swing. Before 10:00 P.M. the streets
are as quiet as a convent. If bars and cafés offer such compelling food, you might imagine
the restaurants to be thrilling. Not exactly. Over centuries, the hot climate, the proximity to
the beach, the southern spirit of sensuality, and the open, relaxed lifestyle of the Jerezanos
all came together in a way that was more suited to the vitality and conviviality of cafés
and bars than to the formality of restaurants. Sherry country is its bars.
   Eating in bars is different from eating in restaurants. Small dishes of many different
simple foods (tapas)—most of which can be picked up with the fingers and eaten standing
up—make more sense than full plates requiring correct utensils. Food historians suggest
that the custom of eating tapas, which can be found throughout Spain today, began in
Jerez.
                                      BRANDY DE JEREZ
 Spain makes more brandy than any other country in the world, and most of it is made in Jerez. Every
 Jerez bodega that makes Sherry also makes brandy. All brandies, including Cognac, which is the type of
 brandy made in the region of the same name in France, are spirits distilled from grapes. This
 distinguishes them from, say, Scotch or vodka, which are distillates of grain.
     Alembics, or pot stills, necessary for the process of distillation, were brought to Jerez in the early
 Middle Ages by Muslim tribes as they began their conquest of the Iberian Peninsula. The Arabs used
 alembics to distill fruit and plant essences for the making of medicines and perfumes. The Christians
 soon adopted the Arabic technique, applying it to grapes in particular. The result was a white distillate
 used first to fortify the local wine (the precursor of Sherry) and later to make a stronger beverage on its
 own. From southern Spain, stills and the technique for making brandy spread northward to France and
 ultimately to the rest of western Europe.
    Like Sherry, top Jerez brandies are handcrafted, complex, and made in a solera (which is not true of
 Cognac, Armagnac, or brandies made elsewhere in the world). Since the solera is made up of oak casks
 that once held Sherry, brandy de Jerez takes on unique flavors that tend to be deep, rich, mellow, and
 less acidic than other brandies. Moreover, brandy makers in Jerez use different types of used Sherry
 barrels to steer the flavor of their brandies in different directions. The top brandy of González Byass,
 Lepanto, is matured in fino and dry oloroso barrels, resulting in a subtly nuanced, dry brandy. Cardenal
 Mendoza, from the bodega Sánchez Romate, uses sweet oloroso barrels, and the brandy that they
 produce is correspondingly more honeyed and vanilla-like.
    Brandy de Jerez must be aged a minimum of one and a half years in a solera. The top brandies,
 however, far exceed this minimum and are aged in a solera ten to fifteen years. They are designated on
 the bottle as Brandy de Jerez Solera Gran Reserva. As a group, Solera Gran Reserva brandies are
 considerably less expensive than their cousins, the top Cognacs.
   Among the most renowned gran reservas, in addition to the González Byass Lepanto and the
 Sánchez Romate Cardenal Mendoza, are Carlos I by Pedro Domecq, Conde de Osborne by Osborne,
 and Gran Duque d’Alba by Díez-Mérito.

   As for restaurants, some of the best are ventas—casual places that began as inns for
travelers. In ventas and restaurants you can sometimes find special Andalusian dishes that
emerged from the mingling of Christian and Arab culinary traditions. Local roasted game,
such as duck, partridge, and quail, for example, might first be marinated in Sherry, then
seasoned and/or combined with spices and foods introduced by the Arabs: saffron, cumin,
coriander, almonds, honey, figs, dates, and raisins.
   The precursor to gazpacho, one of the most famous Andalusian dishes, was most
probably the humble, Arabic-influenced cold soup ajo blanco (white garlic). For ajo
blanco, almonds (brought to Spain from Jordan by the Arabs) are pounded and puréed
together with garlic plus vinegar, bread, water, and olive oil. Centuries later, after
Columbus brought tomatoes back to Spain from the Americas, gazpacho would be made
using the same technique, with tomatoes in place of almonds.
          Paper-thin slices of silky Jabugo ham, from black-hoofed Ibérico pigs, are Sherry’s soul mate.

   Soups, in general, are an important part of the cooking of southwest Spain, and they are
always accompanied by a glass of Sherry. Some of the most traditional include sopa de
almejas y piñones (soup made with black clams, garlic, and pine nuts), caldo de perro
gaditano (Cádiz-style fish soup with the juice of bitter oranges), and sopa de mariscos
(shellfish soup).
   In Andalusia overall, and Jerez in particular, no eating establishment is without its
haunch of jamón. The finest Spanish jamón, like fine Italian prosciutto, is the result of a
long, painstaking process, during which the ham is rubbed with sea salt, then hung up to
“sweat,” first in rooms with long vertical windows that allow mountain breezes to mature
and cure the ham, and later in underground cellars. Eventually the salt is washed off,
resulting in a ham that is sweet and almost silky smooth in the mouth. No chemicals are
involved. The entire, natural aging process can take up to eighteen months.
                                            BULL’S MEAT
 Toro, the meat of a bull raised for bullfighting, is an Andalusian culinary specialty. In particular, the
 tenderloin, the tail, and the testicles are prized. Historically, the poor and uneducated believed that eating
 the meat of an especially powerful bullfighting bull would imbue the eater with the bull’s strength,
 courage, and virility.
    Small slaughterhouses were built just outside bullrings where you could (and still can) buy such meat.
 Toro is also sold in Andalusian markets, although this is usually the meat of bulls deemed too passive to
 fight well. While the meat of a bull that has fought is more expensive, the meat of a nonfighter is
 considered more tender, since the animal did not die under stress.


    Spanish jamón comes from two different strains of pig—Ibérico and Landrace (the
white pig that generally provides the ham known as serrano). The black-hoofed Ibéricos,
thought to be related to a particular type of wild boar that once roamed the Iberian
Peninsula, have a somewhat more complex, sweet, nutty, and profound flavor than the
Landrace, thanks to their diet of wild roots, bulbs, corn, wheat, and especially acorns, on
which the animals gorge themselves. The most prized Ibéricos come from the village of
Jabugo, in the province of Huelva, just north of Sherry country. Many European
connoisseurs consider jamón de Jabugo the world’s ultimate cured ham, surpassing even
the finest prosciutto. In the best restaurants, taverns, and bars of Jerez, jamón de Jabugo is
sliced paper thin, fanned out on a plate, and eaten at room temperature. Purists accompany
it with one thing only: a glass of Sherry.

                                WHEN YOU VISIT… JEREZ
          THE DARK, cathedral-like ambiance and the deep, incense-like smell of a Sherry
          bodega must be experienced to be believed. Plus the majestic sight of thousands of
          huge black barrels stacked up into soleras is nothing short of awe-inspiring. Be sure to
          bring sunglasses. Emerging from the dark bodegas into the white-bright Sherry
          sunshine is blinding.
          SHERRY COUNTRY is full of great seafood bars—especially in the seaside cities of
          Puerto de Santa María and Sanlúcar de Barrameda. Bring your appetite!
                                 The Sherries to Know
The styles of Sherry are so varied that I’m convinced no one can not like at least one them. Speaking for myself, I
could spend days, weeks, months, in the cathedral-like bodegas of Jerez, just smelling what is one of the most
complex wines of the world. The Sherries below are listed from the driest and lightest to the sweetest and fullest.




                                                    HIDALGO

                                           MANZANILLA | LA GITANA
                                               100% Palomino fino
Hidalgo’s Manzanilla La Gitana (the gypsy) possesses a gossamerlike complexity that is evident every second you
drink it—from the layered aroma of green moss, green olives, bitter almonds, and vanilla to the crisp, sea-fresh
snap of minerally flavor to the wine’s shimmering, nutty, minty finish. Manzanillas simply do not get more
inspiring.
                                                  VALDESPINO

                                                FINO | INOCENTE
                                               100% Palomino fino
A ballet dancer of a fino—twirling on the palate with effortless grace. The wine starts out with a mossy, almondy
aroma that draws you in with its elegance and complexity. Then the flavors emerge—waves of vanilla, almonds,
minerals, crisp apples, and something that seems uncannily like honey dipped in cream. There’s not a trace of the
bitterness sometimes apparent in other finos. Before it is moved through the solera, the base wine is fermented in
wood to give the flavors additional nuance. The Valdespino bodega is one of the oldest in Jerez and is still family
owned and operated. This is a single-vineyard fino, a rarity in Spain.
                                                 BARBADILLO

                                AMONTILLADO | VERY OLD RARE SHERRY
                                               100% Palomino fino
This amontillado started its life as a manzanilla, and as a result, it’s an extremely elegant, pure, and aromatic
amontillado. The wine surges with sublime flavors of bitter orange, black pepper, cocoa, toasted hazelnuts, brioche,
and sea salt—indeed, it is so expressive and lively, it’s almost kinetic on the palate. Despite their light body and
refinement, amontillados have a dramatic character that comes from flor, and this Barbadillo is no exception. A
fantastic aperitif, it’s superbly long on the palate, and begging for some thin slices of sweet-salty jamón.
                                               GONZÁLEZ BYASS

               PALO CORTADO | APÓSTOLES | MUY VIEJO | VERY OLD RARE SHERRY
                                    87% Palomino fino, 13% Pedro Ximénez
In 1862, with grapes specially pressed in honor of Spain’s Queen Isabel II, González Byass founded a solera known
as the Apóstoles. A century later, the solera was found among the more than 100,000 barrels in the bodega’s
cavernous cellars. And from that solera emerged a glorious elixir the color of burnt oranges, with a neon green tinge
at the edge. Only very small amounts of Apóstoles are bottled (in half-bottles) every year and the wine is wildly
seductive. Its flavors of roasted nuts, tangerine rind, brown butter, sea salt, crème brûlée, and caramel are so vivid
and concentrated, they have an almost gravitational pull on the taster. The texture is pure satin. Sherries such as
Apóstoles are primordial in their appeal, and no wine lover should miss them.
                                               EMILIO LUSTAU

                   OLOROSO | EMPERATRIZ EUGENIA | SOLERA GRAN RESERVA |
                                         VERY OLD RARE SHERRY
                                              100% Palomino fino
The best olorosos are a tsunami of profoundly lush flavors, and the Emperatriz Eugenia is the perfect example.
Bone-dry and more nutty than any nut, the wine’s complex, elegant flavors range over the whole sensory landscape
of Sherry—from toffee and dates to dark chocolate, dark tobacco, and sea salt. The sheer depth of these flavors is
mesmerizing. There are, in fact, many stupendous olorosos made in Jerez, but I consistently find Emperatriz
Eugenia to be the most mind-blowing. The long, slow arc of sensation on the palate is not to be believed.
                                                   OSBORNE

                      PEDRO XIMÉNEZ | VENERABLE | VERY OLD RARE SHERRY
                                             100% Pedro Ximénez
Here it is—the apotheosis of the PX style—as soft and hedonistic as velvet, with powerfully explosive flavors.
Drinking this super-charged wine is an otherworldly experience. You almost feel as if the wine is consuming you,
rather than the other way around. The flavors of dark chocolate, raisins, café au lait, fig jam, and licorice swirl
around with abandon. In Jerez, it’s not unusual to find men smoking cigars and eating ice cream over which a great
Pedro Ximénez like this one has been (sacrilegiously) poured.
                                          BODEGAS TORO ALBALÁ

                                     PEDRO XIMÉNEZ | GRAN RESERVA
                                              100% Pedro Ximénez
This wine, usually thought of as a Sherry, is actually from Montilla-Moriles, next door to Jerez and the source of
most of the great Pedro Ximénez wines. Drinking it can only be described as a surreal experience. Black-mahogany
in color, with greenish glints, it flows against the side of the glass like molasses or some wicked version of
Christmas pudding. The flavors are as savory as they are sweet—black figs, miso, café au lait, tobacco, and dark fat
raisins. Some Toro Albalá wines carry a vintage date (not allowed for Sherries, per se). Two Toro Albalás on the
market currently are the 1910 and the 1982 Toro Albalá PX called Ginés Liébana.
The Penèdes, on the outskirts of Barcelona, is where Spanish sparkling wine—cava—is born.
PENEDÈS

The Penedès wine region is in Catalonia, arguably the most dynamic province in Spain
and the epicenter of Spanish art, literature, philosophy, gastronomy, finance, and culture.
Catalonia is a province fervent about politics and religion; a province where everyone
speaks Catalan first, Spanish second; a province that cultivates creativity and genius. The
painters Joan Miró, Salvador Dalí, and Pablo Picasso were all Catalan—as was the
astoundingly avant-garde architect Antonio Gaudí, and the cellist Pablo Casals. The opera
singers Montserrat Caballé and José Carreras, who still enchant live audiences, are also
both Catalan. Catalonian artistry and exuberance is evident in the region’s wines as well.
   The region is anchored by one of the most spirited cities of the Mediterranean—
Barcelona. Indeed, the vibrant gastronomy, culture, and nightlife of Barcelona spill over
into the Penedès, giving it an edge that many sleepy rural wine regions lack. Driving
southwest out of the city, you pass through several miles of ugly industrial sprawl, but
soon the sway of pine- and orchard-covered hills takes hold. Farther along, a patchwork
quilt of vineyards unfolds across the rolling landscape. From the warm coastal land, the
vineyards progress upward to higher and cooler elevations inland. Although relatively
modest in surface area, the Penedès spans two mountain chains and a valley, and thus has
a wide variety of climatic conditions and soil types.
   The Penedès is only one of several Denominaciones de Origen within Catalonia, but it
continues to be, along with Priorat, one of the most important.

                       THE QUICK SIP ON THE PENEDÈS
         THE PENEDÈS is best known for cava—Spanish sparkling wine made by the
         traditional (Champagne) method. Cava has been produced here since the 1870s.
         IN ADDITION TO CAVA, a wide variety of still wines are made in the Penedès; many
         are simple wines made in a modern style.
         THE PENEDÈS is a patchwork quilt of tradition and modernity. International grape
         varieties such as cabernet sauvignon are grown side by side with native Spanish
         varieties like macabeo and cariñena.

   Winemaking in the Penedès has deep roots. Amphorae and Egyptian wine jars
uncovered at archaeological sites suggest that wine was introduced to Penedès by the
Phoenicians some seven centuries before Christ. For the past two and a half millennia, the
production of these still wines continued.
   But when the very first cava (sparkling wine made in the same traditional manner as
Champagne) was produced here in 1872, the course of Penedès winemaking changed
forever. By the early part of the twentieth century, a handful of family bodegas had begun
to specialize in it. Today, cava is Penedès’s best-loved specialty, and there are just over
250 cava producers, including the two largest sparkling wine firms in the world, Freixenet
and Codorníu, both of which are known today for their well-priced, commercial versions.
During harvest each of these bodegas presses more than a thousand tons of grapes every
day. There are a handful of smaller producers as well, and the most distinctive, highest
quality cavas come from these. Among them—Gramona, Recaredo, Castellroig, Raventós
i Blanc, Mestres, and Bohigas. Ironically, the period during which cava was born was also
a golden age for Catalonian still wines. Between 1868 and 1886, Catalonia produced
nearly half of all the simple table wine in Spain. The best still wines were exported
throughout Europe and as far away as Latin America. But it was French misfortune that
catapulted Catalonian wines to their greatest recognition. As the vineyards of France were
ravaged by oidium, a parasitic fungus, and phylloxera, an insect that destroys vines by
attacking their roots, the production of Penedès and Rioja wines surged to accommodate
French thirst.




    Codorniu, one of the large cava firms, was also the first to use chardonnay as part of the blend for its cavas.

    The Penedès bodegas that specialize in still wines today are generally small and
focused on making inexpensive wines from both indigenous and international varieties.
The leading still wine firm, however, is not small at all—Torres, a family-owned company,
is one of the largest and most innovative in Spain. (More on Torres can be found under
Penedès Still Wines, page 482).
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

The Penedès region is set off by striking natural boundaries. To the north is the Montserrat
Massif, an awe-inspiring geological formation of mountains that, from a distance,
resemble the teeth of a saw. To the east and south is the Mediterranean Sea. The terrain
rises in a rugged, steplike fashion from warm coastal land (the Low Penedès) to cooler
high plateaus more than 2,600 feet (790 meters) above sea level (the High Penedès). A
great many different mesoclimates are wedged into this modestly sized area of some
64,000 acres (25,900 hectares).
                           THE GRAPES OF THE PENEDÈS
                                              WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: Increasingly used for cava, along with the native grapes listed below. Contributes
 finesse and aroma. Also used for still wines.
 MACABEO: Spelled macabeu in Catalan. Major grape for cava and still wines; contributes fruity flavors
 and acidity. This is the grape known as viura in Rioja.
 MUSCAT: Grown in small amounts and used for dry white wines that can be lovely and light, with
 amazing fruity aromas. The leading type of muscat in the area is muscat blanc à petits grains.
 PARELLADA: Major grape for cava and still wines; contributes delicacy and aroma. Considered to be
 the key variety that contributes a sense of finesse to cava.
 SUBIRAT PARENT: The Catalan name for the variety alarije, which originated in Extremadura, in
 southwest Spain. Used in the DO Penedès and sometimes used in cava.
 XAREL-LO: Major grape for cava and still wines; xarel-lo contributes body and acidity. Xarel-lo has a
 resiny, citrus character that can be especially attractive in still wines.

                                                REDS
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Used alone and in blending to add depth, structure, complexity, and aging
 potential.
 CARIÑENA: Major grape of Spanish origin; in blends, contributes alcohol, body, and tannin. Known as
 mazuelo in Rioja and as carignan in France.
 GARNACHA: Spanish grape with minor importance in the Penedès. Contributes body and spiciness to
 still wines and rosé cava. Known as grenache in France.
 MERLOT: Minor grape generally used in blending to add depth, complexity, and aging potential.
 MONASTRELL: Spanish grape of minor importance in the Penedès. Adds substantial body to still wines
 and rosé cava. Known as mourvèdre in France.
 PINOT NOIR: An important variety used in some cavas, although only a small amount is grown.
 TREPAT: Indigenous red variety grown in small amounts to be used primarily in rosé cava.
 ULL DE LLEBRE: Catalan for “eye of the hare,” and the local name for tempranillo. A major grape, it
 contributes finesse, acidity, and aging potential.

   The Montserrat mountain range acts as an umbrella against harsh northern winds, and
the Mediterranean Sea warms and tempers the climate. The diverse geology means the soil
varies considerably. Much of it is sedimentary in nature, with considerable sand and clay.
Small deposits of limestone are scattered throughout the region.
    The production of white wines far outweighs the production of red wines in the
Penedès, and sparkling wines greatly outnumber still wines. As a result, the three leading
grapes are the native white grapes parellada, macabeo, and xarel-lo. Increasingly,
chardonnay is also used for cava, either on its own or blended with the native varieties.
These four grape varieties are also blended together or used on their own to make white
still wines.
   As for grapes used to make red and rosé wines, ull de llebre (the local Catalan name for
tempranillo, it translates as “eye of the hare”) and cariñena are the most important
traditional varieties—ull de llebre for its balance, good acidity, and aging potential;
cariñena for its alcohol, body, and tannin. Among international varieties, cabernet
sauvignon leads in importance. Again, all of these varieties are used together in blends as
well as on their own. Other red varieties used mostly for blending include the native
grapes garnacha (which the French call grenache) and monastrell (mourvèdre to the
French), and the international variety merlot.
                                                  CAVA

Cava was the brainchild of Don José Raventós, head of the bodega Codorníu, who
traveled throughout Europe during the 1860s selling red and white still wines, which the
firm had been making since 1551. On one such mission, Raventós found himself in
Champagne, where he was fascinated by the local sparkling wine. He returned to the
Penedès keen to attempt his own sparkler. Using imported Champagne equipment and the
three local white grapes still used in most cava today, Raventós produced Spain’s first
traditional method sparkler in 1872. The new wine was considered an intriguing triumph.

                                   BILLIONS OF BUBBLES
    More than 245 million bottles of cava are sold each year. While small bodegas may make fewer than
    5,000 bottles a year, the two largest firms, Freixenet (FRESH-en-ette) and Codorníu (co-door-KNEW),
    make far more—96 million bottles a year and 48 million bottles a year, respectively—and most of that is
    every-night, inexpensive bubbly. This makes Freixenet and Codorníu the two largest sparkling wine
    producers in the world. In addition to being rivals in Spain, the firms also compete in California.
    Freixenet (the name derives from La Freixenada—“grove of ash trees,” the name of the family’s
    thirteenth-century home estate) owns the sparkling wine maker Gloria Ferrer; Codorníu owns Artesa
    Winery. Both California wineries are in the Carneros district, at the southern end of Napa and Sonoma.




   Around this time, a small group of successful, forward-thinking winemaking families,
including the Raventós family, began meeting every Sunday after the ten o’clock Mass to
discuss wine and share information. From these gatherings, an ambitious notion began to
take shape. Why not convert all of the local still wines to sparkling and establish Penedès
as Spain’s Champagne region?
  When cava was first produced, it was called champán or xampany. Penedès
winemakers, however, later decided that the sparkler was different enough from
Champagne to deserve its own name. They agreed on cava, Catalan for “cave” or “cellar.”
   The nascent Penedès sparkling wine industry had barely begun, however, before it was
ravaged by phylloxera in 1887. Luckily, several cava firms were able to survive until the
antidote to phylloxera—replanting European vines on American rootstock that can tolerate
the insect—was discovered. Today, by law, cava can be made in any of six wine regions;
however, 95 percent of all cava—and the best of it—is made in Penedès. Indeed, the heart
and soul of its production is the sleepy town of Sant Sadurní d’Anoia (in Catalan, or San
Sadurní de Noya in Spanish) about 27 miles (43 kilometers) southwest of Barcelona.
   To be called cava, a Spanish sparkling wine must be made by the same process
employed in making Champagne, in which the secondary fermentation (which creates the
bubbles) takes place in each individual bottle (see page 181). (Lower-quality Spanish
sparkling wines are made by the tank or bulk process method and cannot be called cava.)
On each bottle of cava, you’ll find the term Método Tradicional, indicating that the wine
was made by the traditional (Champagne) method.
   Less than 3 percent of all cava is rosé, but those rosés are exported and they can be
delicious. Rosé cava tends to be fuller-bodied than the white. The pink tinge may come
from the addition of pinot noir, garnacha, monastrell, or the local variety trepat.
   Like Champagne, cava ranges in sweetness, and the residual sugar that defines each
category (brut nature, brut, extra dry, and so on) is the same as in Champagne (see How
Dry Is That Champagne?, page 182). With cava, the driest categories (especially brut
nature and brut) are the most popular styles.
   Also like Champagne, a cava can be either a nonvintage or a vintage wine. In
nonvintage cava, the wines that constitute the blend may come from several different
years. In vintage cava, all of the wines in the blend come from the same year. Finally, the
terms reserva and gran reserva can be used on cava. Reserva indicates that the cava has
been aged on its yeast lees at least fifteen months. Gran Reserva means the wine spent at
least thirty months on the yeast lees.
Most cava today is riddled by gyropalette, though some small firms, such as Can Quetu, still use wooden racks and turn
                                                  the bottles by hand.
                                    THE GYROPALETTE
 In the early 1970s, Freixenet invented the gyropalette, sometimes called a girasol, Spanish for
 “sunflower”—a spherical steel frame that mimics rémuage, the process of gradually moving the sediment
 down into the downturned neck of the wine bottle. For more than two centuries in the Champagne region,
 rémuage was done by hand, bottle by bottle, a process that is extremely time-consuming and costly. A
 typical gyropalette, by comparison, holds hundreds of bottles of sparkling wine, and the entire frame is
 tilted and rotated incrementally by computer. Many studies have shown that gyropalettes are as effective
 at moving the spent yeasts down into the neck as traditional rémuage. Gyropalettes are now widely used
 throughout Spain, and in California and France.

    Cava must, by law, be made from one or more of seven grape varieties: parellada,
xarello, macabeo, and chardonnay (the four most important); plus pinot noir; subirat, a
white variety that belongs to the ancient malvasia family of grapes; and the native variety
trepat, a high-acid red. The first three are the most common and are used in widely
varying proportions depending on the bodega, but rarely is one included to the exclusion
of the others. Xarel-lo contributes a generous, round body and good acidity and is
considered by many cava producers to be the grape that contributes the most personality to
cava. Macabeo is fruity and aromatic and also has good acidity. Parellada is the most
delicate of the three Spanish grapes, and is grown in the higher, cooler vineyards. When
chardonnay is added to these three varieties, the resulting cava often has more finesse. The
first cava to include chardonnay was Codorníu’s Anna de Codorníu, in 1981. Today, many
cavas include chardonnay, and several are made entirely from it.
                                         PAN CON COMFORT
 Nothing could be more different than the behavior of the Spanish drinking cava and the behavior of the
 French drinking Champagne. Champagne is clearly a luxury sometimes accompanied by comparable
 indulgences, like caviar. Cava, on the other hand, is comfort wine, the perfect way to begin a summer
 evening, especially when the cava is accompanied by a humble appetizer like pan con tomate, the
 Catalonian specialty of thick slices of warm grilled country bread, rubbed on both sides with the cut side
 of a juicy, ripe tomato and then drizzled with extra virgin olive oil. Cava and pan con tomate is any-night
 fare—no special occasion required. Price, of course, has something to do with this, but then cava is
 nothing if not a steal.

   Lastly, even though Champagne was the inspiration for cava, there is an important line
to be drawn between them. Cava does not hold the same “social standing” in Spain as
Champagne does in France. An everyman’s every-night beverage, cava is not necessarily a
celebratory wine, as Champagne has remained—at least for some wine drinkers (this
author excepted). I have been in restaurants in Barcelona where the waiter, without our
realizing it, brought bottle after bottle of cava and poured it freely, for no other reason than
we “looked thirsty.”

                    WHO WOULDN’T WANT TO BE THE BABY?
     Since its beginnings at the turn of the twentieth century, cava has been readily consumed by the middle
     classes. Barcelona has dozens of xampanyeria, wine bars specializing in Spanish sparklers. It is a
     Catalonian family tradition to drive to Sant Sadurní on Saturdays for a picnic of cava and grilled lamb.
     Bodegas sell locally raised lamb and rent outdoor stone fireplaces. Of course, the sparkler is also sipped
     ceremoniously. At a baptism, everyone drinks cava, even the baby, whose pacifier is dipped in the bubbly.
     Not to be left out (cava is a wine for everyone, after all), and possibly more important, other babies may be
     given the same treat as a way of keeping them quiet in church.




It’s hard to imagine a more simple but more satisfying appetizer than the Catalan specialty pan con tomate. Thick slices
 of warm, grilled country bread are rubbed with fresh tomato (and sometimes garlic), then drizzled with Spanish extra
               virgin olive oil. All kinds of wine work brilliantly with this humble dish, but I vote for cava.
    In addition, there’s a vast difference in grapes used. The three main cava grapes have
unique flavors and aromas that are different from those of chardonnay and pinot noir.
Cava, moreover, is more often than not the product of all-white grapes, unlike most
Champagne, which is a marriage of white and red grapes. The number of separate still
wines blended to create cava is far smaller than the number of still wines in a Champagne
blend (which includes dozens, sometimes hundreds of base wines). Most nonvintage cava
is aged in contact with the yeasts for nine months, the legal minimum, while many
nonvintage Champagnes are aged at least fifteen months and usually far longer. Finally,
there is the critical issue of terroir. Climatically and geologically, Penedès and Champagne
have almost nothing in common. How conceivable is it that the two wines could mirror
each other in flavor?
   All of this comes down to the fact that most cava tends to be fairly simple. Lemony,
earthy, and somewhat mushroomy, it’s fruitier and has less frothy foam than Champagne
or sparkling wine from California. But, like California sparklers, the best cavas have a
bright, citrusy streak of acidity running through them and are refreshing on the palate.
                       SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF CAVA
  1 + 1 = 3 • Agustí Torelló Mata • Castellblanch • Cavas Hill • Chatel • Codorníu • D’Abbatis • Freixenet •
 Huguet • Jaume Serra • Maria Casanovas • Miro • Mont Marçal • Paul Cheneau • Segura Viudas • Vilarnau
                                    The Cavas to Know
Bubbles for a steal. Is there anything better? I love the way the Spanish view cava—as a weekly necessity; no big
deal. Here are some of my favorite cavas, all of them satisfyingly delicious.

                                                   WHITES




                                                    1+1=3
                                              NONVINTAGE BRUT
                         Approximately 45% xarel-lo, 30% parellada, 25% macabeo
Like water bursting against a rock in a mountain stream, this cava has a vivacity and freshness that’s immediately
appealing. The wine is crisp and clean, with little of the earthy, mushroomy flavor that many traditional cavas
possess. Instead, the wine is creamy and appley—the wine version of fresh, homemade applesauce.
                                                PAUL CHENEAU

                                    LADY OF SPAIN | NONVINTAGE BRUT
                         Approximately 45% macabeo, 40% xarel-lo, 15% parellada
The bold yellow and red graphics on Lady of Spain evoke the kind of passionate patriotism Spaniards are known
for. The cava inside the bottle is equally bold—a refreshing splash of a wine that has the same kind of thirst-
quenching attack as cold ginger ale. I love the light pear and apple notes that give the wine a touch more dimension.
And don’t miss the Paul Cheneau Blanc de Blancs Reserva Brut, with its appley/yeasty character that is reminiscent
of a delicious Danish pastry.




                                                     HUGUET

                                 GRAN RESERVA | VINTAGE BRUT NATURE
                        Approximately 56% parellada, 23% macabeo, 21% pinot noir
Complex is a word not often heard in relation to cava, but the Huguet cannot be described any other way. It
manages to be both breathtakingly dry, taut, and focused, and at the same time, creamy, generous, and supple. The
wine comes from parellada grapes grown in select vineyards above 1,200 feet (370 meters), and only when an
importer or wine shop orders the wine is it riddled to remove the yeasts and disgorged, thereby giving the wine as
much aging time in contact with the yeasts as possible.
                                          AGUSTÍ TORELLÓ MATA

                                               RESERVA | BRUT
                         Approximately 39% macabeo, 38% parellada, 23% xarel-lo
This is always one of my favorite cavas. Its strong citrus, ginger, and bitter notes are edgy and cleansing on the
palate—almost in the way a Campari cocktail would be. Two other Agustí Torelló Mata wines are also worth
seeking out: the Brut Rosat Trepat, a rosé cava made from the indigenous trepat grape (shimmering with strawberry
flavor), and the creamy, complex Kripta, one of the most remarkable cavas around, made from very old macabeo,
xarel-lo, and parellada vines.




                                               SEGURA VIUDAS

                                         ARIA | NONVINTAGE BRUT
                         Approximately 50% macabeo, 40% parellada, 10% xarel-lo
Made by the well known cava producer Segura Viudas, Aria is as alive, vibrant, and distinct as a saxophone solo.
The usual earthiness and sometimes heavy fruitiness of cava is nowhere in evidence. Instead, there’s a shower of
lemon, and the tart snap at the end could challenge a Granny Smith apple.
                                               SEGURA VIUDAS

                               HEREDAD | RESERVA | NONVINTAGE BRUT
                                Approximately 67% macabeo, 33% parellada
The Earth Mother of cavas, the Segura Viudas Heredad (Spanish for “estate”) is the most satisfying example of the
creamy/earthy/spicy/almondy style of cava. The wine’s copious flavors reverberate in your mouth. Its texture is
both effervescent and silky. Heredad comes in what is surely the most expensive custom-made bottle in the
Penedès. Labeled with a pewter crest, it is anchored by a carved pewter base that acts as the bottle’s coaster.
                          PENEDÈS STILL WINES

As the cava industry began to take serious form, Penedès still wines continued to evolve.
The leading winery, Torres, was established in 1870. More than ever, this large (producing
3 million cases each year), family-owned dynasty epitomizes the maverick streak for
which Catalans are known.
    Torres has experimental plantings of over 250 different non-Penedès varieties,
including roussanne, syrah, and chenin blanc from France; riesling and Müller-Thurgau
from Germany; nebbiolo from Italy; and zinfandel from the United States. In addition to
these, the winery has begun cultivating nearly extinct, ancient Catalan varieties that were
common pre-phylloxera. In 1970, when virtually all other Spanish whites were flat, soft,
and even partially oxidized from being made and aged in wood, Torres produced Viña Sol,
a snappy, aromatic, fresh white, made from 100 percent parellada, and the first white wine
in the country to be fermented in temperature-controlled, stainless-steel tanks. The winery
is also environmentally conscious. Having shunned pesticides nearly two decades ago,
they are today committed to reducing the winery’s CO2 emissions by 30 percent by 2020.
   Torres went on to a number of other firsts, but their greatest achievement has always
been the bodega’s most prestigious wine, formerly called Gran Coronas Black Label (now
known as Mas La Plana), made from 100 percent cabernet sauvignon. In 1979, when that
wine (then a cabernet/tempranillo/monastrell blend) was slipped into a French blind
tasting and came out on top, over a field of renowned classified Bordeaux, Torres’s
reputation for quality was sealed. Today, under the leadership of the hard-driving Miguel
A. Torres, the family also owns wineries in Ribera del Duero and Rioja, as well as in
Chile, where they were one of the early European investors in the modern era. In 1997, the
ever-visionary bodega even established a joint venture in China, called Great Wall Torres.
And, of course, Torres has a California operation—Marimar Estate, a prominent small
winery in Sonoma, California, run by Marimar Torres, Miguel’s sister. Indeed, the
influential British magazine Decanter named Miguel the most influential Spanish
winegrower of all, and placed him second on the “Power List” of vintners worldwide.
   The impulse to be avant-garde and the penchant for experimentation is not, however,
limited to such a large bodega as Torres. The far smaller bodega Jean León was the first to
plant and then produce chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon in the late 1960s. Cuttings for
the chardonnay came from the Corton-Charlemagne holdings of Louis Jadot, and the
cabernet came from Château Lafite-Rothschild. I pulled a bottle of 1977 Jean León
cabernet sauvignon from my cellar recently. It was thirty-five years old, and its aroma was
as sensual as an old Bordeaux; the rich cassis fruit was mesmerizing. The Penedès may be
best known for its every-night wines, but in the hands of a great producer, these still wines
can be almost shockingly good. Besides Torres and Jean León, there are many other
excellent small producers of still wines, including the single-estate (pago) Can Rafòls dels
Caus. The cava producer Segura Viudas also makes a very fine still Penedès wine called
Creu de Lavit.
Zarzuela (Spanish seafood stew) in a bar in Barcelona is pretty unbeatable.
                    THE FOODS OF THE PENEDÈS

Catalonian cuisine is the most complex and richly seasoned in Spain. The province’s
proximity to France, as well as Barcelona’s longstanding role as a pivotal Mediterranean
port, have given Catalonian food a depth, dimension, and sophistication not found in the
other, more provincial regions of Spain. Although it is sometimes suggested that
Catalonian cooking is similar to the cooking of Provence and various regions of Italy,
something closer to the reverse is true. During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, before
Spain financed the exploration of the Americas, the kingdom of Aragon, including what is
now Catalonia, ruled part of France as well as the kingdoms of Sicily and Naples. The
cuisine that flourished within these regions was a fertile mingling of Mediterranean ideas.
Early on, Catalonian cooking was infused with a certain worldliness.
   If cooking can be thought of as the voice of a given land, then traditional Catalonian
cooking tells the story of sea coast, farmland, and mountains. The larder includes shellfish,
fish, lamb, wild game, veal, and pork, plus olive oil, garlic, tomatoes, onions, peppers,
saffron, herbs, almonds, hazelnuts, fruits, and wine. Intriguingly, seafood is often
combined with meat (spiny lobster and chicken in hazelnut sauce; baby squid stuffed with
pork in chocolate sauce) as is meat with fruit (baby goose baked with pears; rabbit with
quince and honey).
   Four all-important sauces act as ties binding individual foods together. They are: alioli,
sofrito, picada, and romesco. These are not truly sauces in the classic sense, however, but
bold seasonings, unmasked by butter or cream. Alioli (or allioli in the Catalan spelling) is
a mayonnaise-like emulsion of garlic and olive oil used as a condiment; sofrito (sofregit in
Catalan), which is tomatoes and onion cooked in olive oil, is used as a flavor base; picada,
a paste of garlic, almonds, olive oil, and possibly parsley, chocolate, saffron, and
hazelnuts, is used as a seasoning and thickener; and romesco (samfaina in Catalan) is
made from finely chopped almonds or hazelnuts combined with dried sweet peppers and
tomatoes, and is used both as a base and as a sauce.
   Though it is often dramatic, Catalonian food is never fussy. The best-loved traditional
dish of all is pan con tomate, called in Catalan pa amb tomàquet—bread with tomato—
grilled country bread rubbed with ripe tomato, then drizzled with olive oil and sprinkled
with salt. Pan con tomate, along with a few grilled fresh anchovies or slices of mountain
ham, often begins a meal.
   Other Catalonian classics include: canalones, the Catalonian version of Italian
cannelloni, which are stuffed with ground pork, ground duck, spinach, veal, game, or fish;
zarzuela (sarsuela in Catalan), a full-blown stew of shellfish and seafood, rather like
bouillabaisse; bacalao (bacalla), dried salt cod that is made into many dishes, including
brandade (brandada), for which it is desalted and whipped with potatoes, olive oil, and
lots of garlic into a dish resembling mashed potatoes; and mar i mutanya, Catalan for “sea
and mountain,” a homey ragout of fish and meat—sometimes chicken and prawns,
sometimes rabbit, monkfish, and snails.
          A MUST VISIT: THE MONASTERY OF MONTSERRAT
 Built into the jagged peaks of one of the most awesome mountain ranges in the world is the monastery of
 Montserrat, poised like a guardian angel over the vineyards of the Penedès. Some say the mountains,
 which are shaped more like cylinders than pyramids, resemble contorted human forms; others, the
 ragged teeth of a saw. In fact, the words mont serrat in Catalan mean “sawtooth mountain.” The monks
 say the range was sawn by God.
   The large Benedictine order living at Montserrat is devoted to preserving Catalonian culture—a
 mission that endears them to the Catalans. (So much so that in tribute, thousands of Catalonian girls are
 named Montserrat—Montse for short.)
    In the past, Montserrat served as a political refuge. Under Franco’s rule, scholars, artists, politicians,
 and students went there to meet in rooms that the monks rented out for a small fee. It was not unusual
 for the military police to be waiting a few miles down the mountainside. The monks still rent rooms,
 mostly now to poets in need of solitude or artists who want to paint.
    The monastery includes a museum of Catalonian art and a 200,000-volume library of rare manuscripts
 and engravings. There is also Montserrat’s music school, Escolania, which dates from the thirteenth
 century, making it one of the oldest music schools in Europe. The fifty choir boys, who live and study with
 the monks, sing daily for visitors.
    It is said that no Catalonian couple is ever truly married until they have come together to Montserrat,
 so the monastery is always full of wedding parties. On Sundays, these parties often break into the
 sardana, a gentle, rhythmic Catalonian round dance thought to be of Greek origin. Although it starts off
 as a small group of people holding hands, within minutes, the sardana is being danced by hundreds of
 people as everyone around joins in.
    The monastery is dedicated to La Moreneta, “the little dark one”—a sculpted black Virgin dating from
 the twelfth century.


   And for dessert, there is crema catalana, the Catalonian version of the French dessert
crème brûlée, a rich, creamy custard with a sheet of caramelized sugar on top. Catalans
would wince to hear crema catalana thus described. The French dessert, they say, was
inspired by theirs, not the other way around. Several food historians agree.
   Lastly, and this may be the biggest statement of all regarding Catalonian gastronomy:
Catalonia is where the modern world’s most famous restaurant, El Bulli, was once to be
found. A small, seaside restaurant on a bay on Catalonia’s Costa Brava, El Bulli advanced
the art and science of gastronomy perhaps more than any other restaurant in the past half
century. Its founder, chef Ferran Adrià, has been described in the New York Times as “the
most imaginative generator of haute cuisine on the planet.” Although El Bulli closed in
2011, food lovers the world over are holding their collective breath, awaiting Adrià’s next
step behind a restaurant stove.
The fishing village of San Gregorio de Raxó in Rías Baixas. The region’s thriving coastal towns (and their taverns, cafés,
                 and restaurants) underlie the question: Which came first—food or wine? Chicken or egg?


                            WHEN YOU VISIT… THE PENEDÈS
            THE CAVA GIANTS, Freixenet and Codorníu, offer sophisticated educational tours in
            several languages, and Codorníu also has a striking wine museum. By comparison, at
            a small cava bodega, visitors are generally taken around by the owner/winemaker, and
            appointments must be made in advance. At small bodegas, it helps to speak Spanish.
            BARCELONA is less than an hour’s drive from the Penedès wine region, and boasts
            some fantastic wine bars. Three of the best are Monvínic, Vila Viniteca, and La Vinya
            del Senyor.
RÍAS BAIXAS

When the small white wine region of Rías Baixas (RE-ez BUY-shez), in far northwestern
Spain, came to prominence in the 1990s, a new era in Spanish white wine history was
born. With the exception of Sherry, which is fortified, and cava, which is sparkling, the
Spanish wines that have commanded world attention have almost exclusively been red—
not white.
   By the late 1980s and early 1990s, however, modern technology, including the use of
temperature-controlled stainless-steel tanks, could be found in virtually all of the top
wineries making white wine in Spain. Quality skyrocketed. Leading the way were the
wines of Rías Baixas, a remote wine region poised on the Atlantic just above Portugal, in
the southern part of the province of Galicia. Here, white grapes had been grown for
centuries. But it wasn’t until the technological revolution that the wines of Rías Baixas
began to be considered among the best white wines in Spain.
   Rías Baixas takes its name from the Galician rías, which are sharp, fjordlike estuaries
that slice like cobalt swords into the baixas, or lower part of southern Galicia. This is one
of the world’s most breathtaking wine regions, and definitely one of the most unusual
looking in Spain. It would be easy to think you were in Ireland or Wales—until you take
note of the eucalyptus forests that cover the steep hills and deep ravines. Wild scarlet roses
grow out of ancient Roman stone walls. Orange trees dance in the breeze. The
mountainous air is pristine; the sun is like a scoop of lemon sorbet moving in and out of
the thick, coastal clouds. To find vineyards in the middle of this feels as though you’ve
just uncovered a secret no one else knows.
   The best Rías Baixas wines are made principally from the white albariño grape. In fact,
albariño, not Rías Baixas, is the name by which the wines are commonly known and
labeled. This is in complete contrast to other Spanish wine regions, where wines are
typically referred to by region (Rioja), not according to the grape planted (tempranillo).
   Albariño has a unique flavor profile. Not as zaftig as chardonnay, nor as minerally as
riesling, nor as wild and herbal as sauvignon blanc, its flavors range from zingy citrus-
peach to almond-honeysuckle. In texture, albariños are beautifully poised between light
creaminess and crisp zestiness. Indeed, because most albariños are neither fermented nor
aged in wood, the best of them are as light as gossamer on the palate.
        Albariño grapes ripen in the beautiful sunlight of Rías Baixas. Albariño is among Spain’s top grapes.


                            THE QUICK SIP ON RÍAS BAIXAS
          MANY OF SPAIN’S most exciting whites are produced in this tiny northwest wine
          region.
          THE BEST RÍAS BAIXAS WHITES are made from the albariño grape. The word
          albariño appears on every bottle. By comparison, most other Spanish wines are
          referred to by their geographic region rather than by grape variety.
          ALBARIÑO IS A RACY, refreshing wine considered one of the best matches in the
          world for seafood. It’s meant to be drunk young.

    An ancient grape, albariño originated in northeastern Portugal and subsequently moved
over the border to Galicia. (It is still grown in Portugal, where it is one of the grapes that is
made into the Portuguese wine known as vinho verde.) Perhaps because it is so highly
thought of, albariño inspired many folkloric tales before DNA-typing established it as
having originated in Portugal. In one of these, it was brought from the Rhine, in Germany,
in the twelfth century by Cistercian monks on their long pilgrimages to the tomb of the
apostle James in the holy city of Santiago de Compostela, in far western Spain. (During
the Middle Ages, it was thought that that was where the world ended.)

      Galicia’s ancient Celtic heritage is apparent in its music. The traditional local
      instrument is a gaita, similar in appearance and sound to a Scottish bagpipe.

   Interestingly, although albariño and its local cousins were planted in Galicia for
centuries (and some two-hundred-year-old albariño vines still exist there), the wines made
from albariño were never more than humble quaffs. The Galegos—provincial, poor
fishermen that they were—spent very little money on making their wine. Because they
drank every drop, there was never any commercial impetus to improve it. At the bodega
Santiago Ruiz, for example, the old wooden presses and primitive winemaking tools now
displayed in the bodega’s museum look as though they were used more than a century ago.
They were. And they were still being used up until the 1980s.
                           THE GRAPES OF RÍAS BAIXAS
 Rías Baixas is known exclusively for white wines.
 ALBARIÑO: Major grape. Aromatic and flavorful, with a crisp/creamy texture.
 LOUREIRA: Minor grape. Sometimes blended with albariño to add aroma.
 TREIXADURA: Minor grape. Sometimes blended with albariño to add palate weight and aroma.


   Other modern winemaking techniques also came late here, long after such practices had
been established for decades in parts of Europe and in the United States. It was not until
the late 1970s that self-taught Galego winemakers employed processes as fundamental as
settling and racking (allowing microscopic solids like yeasts and bits of grape skin to
settle to the bottom of barrels, then pouring the clear wine on top into fresh, clean barrels).
Statistics portray the radical turnaround best of all. When I first went to Rías Baixas in
1986, there were five commercial wineries. Just two years later, there were eighty-eight.
And by 2011, there were just over 180 bodegas, and more than 6,500 grape growers (each
of whom farms, on average, less than half an acre of vines).
                                         THE GALEGOS
 Rías Baixas is in the province of Galicia, which in numerous ways seems a world apart from Spain. The
 Galegos, as the people of Galicia are called, drink more wine and eat more seafood than any other
 Spaniards. They are hardworking, rural people of Celtic origin who, until the recent building of modern
 transportation routes, were geographically isolated from the rest of the country.
   Like the Basques and the Catalans, the Galegos reinforced their separation and individuality by
 speaking their own distinct language, Galician. A Celtic-sounding quasi-marriage of Spanish and
 Portuguese, Galician is an officially recognized language in the province and is taught, along with
 Spanish, in the schools.


   The exhilarating boom has been driven by an emerging class of wealthy, well-educated
Galegos with a profound sense of regional pride. Throughout the past two decades, small
consortiums of lawyers, doctors, and businessmen have formed, buying and replanting
family vineyards, building small state-of-the-art wineries, investing in modern equipment,
and most important, hiring young, well-trained enologists from Europe’s enology schools.
                     THE BEST SEASIDE TAVERN IN SPAIN
After countless pilgrimages (what else can they be called?) to the world’s wine regions, I keep coming
back to a final, ineluctable truth: The most blissful experiences with food and wine are utterly simple.
They are experiences so pure they leave you helpless, speechless, and nearly mindless with joy—
capable only of licking your fingers.
   Restaurante Xeito, a humble tavern across the road from the sea in the village of Pontevedra, in the
southernmost corner of Galicia, may be the best seaside tavern in Spain. The word xeito refers to the
local art of fishing for sardines. And, as could only be true in a place where fish are revered, the word
also means beauty or charm.
  You walk through the bar to a small back room with no-nonsense red tablecloths, heavy wooden
chairs, and Spanish ceramics on the walls. Nothing about the place prepares you for the fact that this is
unquestionably one of the greatest seafood restaurants in Spain.
   Over the years, the chefs here have been mostly women. And they have all followed a similar routine,
each morning walking across the street to the sea and buying the day’s fish directly off boats that have
just returned with their catch.
   If you like (and most people do), the chef will ask how hungry you are and then proceed to cook for
you as though you were sitting at her kitchen table. She might begin by making miniature croquetas de
bueyes de mar (sweet, creamy crab croquettes) or pimientos del piquillo rellenos (peppers stuffed with
wild mushrooms, prawns, and salmon). Next might come a huge langosta—spiny lobster—with sweet,
juicy, snow-white meat, followed by lenguado a la plancha, a pristine fresh sole broiled with a touch of
ripe olive oil. Each fish is simply cooked and served. There are no adornments, no garnishes, and no
sauces—just waves of oceanic flavor, so pure you could faint.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

The western coast of Galicia is a wet place. Rainfall is heavy, some 45 to 65 inches (114 to
165 centimeters) each year. Yet, critically, the rains usually occur in winter, when the vines
are dormant, not during early fall, around harvest. Still, moisture is a problem that can lead
to mildew, mold, and fungal diseases. Luckily, albariño, with its small, thick-skinned
berries, is not highly susceptible to moisture-induced disease. Additionally, many of the
older vineyards are still trained high up on parras. These are canopies of support wires
attached to 8- to 10-foot-high (2.4- to 3-meter high) granite columns. At harvest, tractors
run under the parras, and pickers, working from stepladders, pick grapes that are over
their heads. Lifted far above the land in this manner, not only are the grapes less affected
by ground moisture but the increased air circulation also helps keep them dry. Dew and
moisture notwithstanding, the presence of the ocean nearby is a positive force (as it is in
Bordeaux), mitigating wide swings in temperature and otherwise extreme climatic
conditions.




   A man plays the gaita, the traditional Galician guitar, outside the majestic cathedral of Santiago de Compostela.

   Although it is a tiny Denominación de Origen, comprising just over 9,000 acres (3,600
hectares), Rías Baixas is spread over five noncontiguous areas. The northernmost zones
are Ribeira de Ulla and Val do Salnés; the most inland and more mountainous zone is
Condado de Tea; Soutomaior is the tiniest; and O Rosal, named for the roses that grow
everywhere, is just over the border from Portugal. Each zone has its share of very good
wines and top producers. The best vineyards have well-draining sandy/granitic soil, some
of which has clay and limestone mixed in. They are planted on southwest-facing slopes to
ensure the maximum number of hours of sun for ripening.
A promontory of coastline at A Coruña, Galicia, on the Atlantic Ocean, right before a storm. Many vineyard owners in
                                     Galicia come from families of fishermen.

    Because it is a difficult grape to grow and is naturally low-yielding, albariño is one of
the most expensive white grapes in Spain. As a result, the wines are never outright steals,
but neither are they as pricey as, say, most well-known French whites. As for personality,
albariño has a lot. Beautifully aromatic, it’s a potpourri of citrus, lime, vanilla, peach,
honey, and kiwi smells. (Interestingly, there are many kiwi orchards in Rías Baixas;
indeed, kiwi was a major crop here until orchards were supplanted by vineyards.) The
irresistible flavors range from almond and citrus to spice and quince. To underscore the
freshness of these flavors, winemakers handle the grapes as little as possible. And
because, historically, albariños were rarely barrel fermented, the flavors were dependably
pure and vibrant. That said, several producers are now experimenting with barrel
fermentation, hoping to make a fuller-bodied, oaky style. The results—literally and
philosophically—have been mixed. Once, while visiting a tiny bodega in Rías Baixas, I
noticed a life-size statue of the Virgin Mary in the corner. The statue was blindfolded.
“What’s with the Virgin?” I asked the winemaker. “Ah,” she said, gesturing to some
brand-new barrels on the other side of the room. “I’m sure the Holy Mother would not
approve of those.”
   Virtually all Rías Baixas bodegas make only one albariño. Such categories as reserva
or gran reserva do not exist. There are a few plantings of red grapes in Rías Baixas, but no
superior red wines have been made.
                    SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF ALBARIÑO
 Adegas Gran Vinum • As Laxas • Fillaboa • Lagar de Cervera • Lusco do Miño • Mar de Frades • Morgadío
  • Pazo de Señorans • Pazo San Mauro • Pazo Serantellos • Salnesur • Salneval • Santiago Ruiz • Terras
                                 Gauda • Vilariño-Cambados • Vionta
                     THE FOODS OF RÍAS BAIXAS

Seafood lovers go mad in Rías Baixas—in fact, anywhere in Galicia—for this is the single
greatest seafood region in a country legendary for its fish. In the north, along the
Cantabrian coast, and in the west, along the Atlantic coast, Galicia is splintered by deep
estuaries (the Rías Altas and Rías Baixas, respectively). These fjordlike channels act as
enormous funnels for fish. The seafood catch in Galicia is one of the largest in Europe.
   Shellfish is pristine and dizzying in its variety: scallops, mussels, prawns, shrimp,
lobster, crayfish, crabs, clams, spiny lobster, sea snails, oysters, cockles, barnacles, and
more. Galicia is also famous for one of the ugliest and most delicious seafoods
imaginable: percebes. Gooseneck gray barnacles the size of a man’s thumb, percebes are
harvested by divers who, wearing protective helmets, lower themselves into the crashing
waves off the treacherous cliffs of Costa de la Muerte, “Death’s Coast.” Each year several
divers die in their pursuit of percebes. The barnacle is, needless to say, expensive.
   Grilled pulpo (octopus), sweet and tender, is another Galician specialty. On Sundays
after church, the bars and tavernas are full of families eating pulpo drizzled with emerald
olive oil and served with wondrously crusty country bread. Glasses of chilled albariño are
found on every table.
   For centuries, the Galegos have been renowned as particularly fearless fishermen who
not only fish the rías but also venture far out into the ocean. Thus, the seafood
kaleidoscope here also includes deep-sea fish, such as cod, hake, sardines, turbot, sole, and
angler.
                                     A BLESSED MARRIAGE
 It hardly seems coincidental that Galicia, renowned in all of Europe for the abundance and variety of its
 seafood, would specialize in a wine considered one of the most compatible in the world with seafood, as
 albariño is. The wine’s capacity to seem both crisp and creamy at the same time, plus its pure, clean
 flavors reminiscent of quince, almonds, ginger, and lemons make it a stunning partner for all sorts of
 simply prepared seafood dishes. But if there’s one type of seafood made just for albariño, it’s scallops.
 The sweet purity of scallops, often overwhelmed by other whites, is perfectly underscored by Spain’s
 most famous white wine. In Galicia itself, scallops have been treasured for centuries. For more than a
 thousand years, the travelers who have walked across northern Spain on religious pilgrimages to the
 tomb of the apostle James in Galicia’s Santiago de Compostela have taken the scallop shell as their
 religious symbol. The stone walls of Santiago’s stunning cathedral are covered with carved scallop
 shells, and during the Middle Ages, the millions who made the pilgrimage each year decorated their
 cloaks and hats with badges in the shape of scallop shells.




  Rías Baixas has some of the best and freshest seafood in Europe. Every fishing village boasts seaside taverns where
                     platters of seafood and bottles of albariño are on every table, no exception.

   Fresh seafood lends itself to utterly simple cooking techniques. Over time, the
simplicity afforded seafood came to define virtually every aspect of Galician cooking. The
most complex Galician specialty, empanadas, is not particularly complicated at all.
Empanadas are double-crusted pies usually filled with scallops, eel, potatoes, sardines,
tuna, or pork. The filling is sautéed in olive oil with peppers, tomatoes, onions, and garlic.
The crust is made from wheat flour or cornmeal. Empanadas are served in the humblest
bars as well as in Galicia’s best restaurants.
   Finally, Galician cookery is also influenced by the region’s Celtic roots. The potato is
revered. In caldo gallego, the region’s most famous peasant stew, potatoes are combined
with kale, beans, pieces of pork (ear and tail), spicy sausage, and sometimes veal and
chicken. Every Galician loves his or her mother’s caldo gallego.
               WHEN YOU VISIT… RÍAS BAIXAS
FOR ANYONE WHO LOVES history or architecture, it would be a big mistake to visit
Rías Baixas without spending time in the cathedral of Santiago de Compostela, one of
the most majestic cathedrals of Europe.
AS FOR THE BODEGAS, most are small, and it’s possible to visit several in a day, but
appointments are necessary. Chances are you will be shown around by the owner or
winemaker. It helps to speak some Spanish.
                      The Rías Baixas Wines to Know
The cool maritime region of Rías Baixas along Spain’s green, northwestern coastline specializes in just one wine.
And it happens to be one of Europe’s best wines for fresh seafood: albariño. The albariños below are all crisp, pure,
bold wines that evoke the intensity of the Atlantic Ocean.




                                             PAZO SERANTELLOS

                                                    ALBARIÑO
                                                  100% albariño
This estate (the term pazo, in Galician, designates a manor house, usually with a chapel, a granary, and a dovecote)
makes albariños with an exotic flair. Lively tangerine and peach aromas waft out of the glass along with scents of
tropical flowers. The flavors evoke mangoes and all sorts of citrus. The freshness here is unmistakable, and just the
ticket for seafood dishes.
                                                     SALNEVAL

                                                     ALBARIÑO
                                                   100% albariño
Counterintuitively, albariño can be creamy and crisp at the same time (this is one of its assets in pairing with food).
Salneval’s albariño demonstrates this delicious textural duplicity. In addition, the fruit flavors here soar across the
palate as if on a beam of light. And the hint of marmalade bitterness on the end gives the wine a terrific edginess.
                                                 LUSCO DO MINO

                                                     ALBARIÑO
                                                   100% albariño
With albariño, purity and intensity of flavor is everything. Lusco (the word means “twilight” in Galician) possesses
both. The wine’s gorgeously concentrated quince, ginger, Asian pear, almond, and orange marmalade flavors are
light but bold at the same time. And bright, focused acidity helps make Lusco irresistible. Best of all, there’s an
elegance and creaminess here that elevate this albariño to top rank.




                                                     AS LAXAS

                                                ALBARIÑO | LAXAS
                                                   100% albariño
Lightly etched and yet deeply profound in flavor, the Laxas albariño is often one of the most full-bodied in Rías
Baixas. The wine smells intriguingly of cream laced with lemon, and the feel on the palate is very much like the
folds of whipped cream. Yet Laxas always has a definitive spiciness and minerally/saline snappiness (perhaps the
result of the bodega’s location near the Miño River). It’s this final jolt that makes the wine such a great counterpoint
to shellfish cooked in garlic and olive oil, as well as Galicia’s other culinary treasures.
                                               PAZO SAN MAURO

                                                    ALBARIÑO
                                                   100% albariño
In an almost Dolly Parton–like fashion, the Pazo San Mauro is tight and fleshy at the same time. In good years, the
wine virtually bursts forward with seductive, lush vanilla-ness, yet it is so refreshing, crisp, and focused that the
flavors seem magnified. The vineyard, which dates from 1591, rests on small, rolling hills along a tiny tributary of
the Miño River. On the other side of the river is Portugal. For centuries, the Portuguese and Galegos have fought
over the vineyard.
                                          ADEGAS GRAN VINUM

                                       ALBARIÑO | ESENCIA DIVIÑA
                                                100% albariño
The best citrus marmalade never tasted as much like citrus marmalade as Esencia Diviña (Divine Essence) does.
Highly aromatic (tangerines, peaches, mangoes), the wine has marmalade’s snappy bittersweetness, and yet it’s
completely dry. At the same time, there’s a light, creamy, lemon-meringue-pie texture here that’s awesome.
                                                   FILLABOA

                                                   ALBARIÑO
                                                  100% albariño
Everything about Fillaboa (“good daughter” in Galician) has energy, from the zesty aromas of lime and fresh apples
to the tight, high-strung minerally flavors. Lots of wines are crisp, of course, but Fillaboa has a piercing sort of
crispness that’s underscored by notes of ginger ale, grapefruit, quince, and citrus.
The Carthusian monastery Scala Dei (“God’s Stairway”) built in Priorat in 1163 on the spot of a miraculous vision.
PRIORAT

Usually known by its Catalan name, Priorat (rather than the Spanish Priorato), Priorat is a
tiny, isolated wine region just inland from Tarragona in Catalonia, on the Mediterranean
coast. Barely heard of in the early part of the 1990s, the region emerged on the
international scene in the latter part of that decade with a handful of exciting and highly
sought-after wines, some of which upstaged even the most prestigious Riojas by costing
four times as much. Priorat boasts the top classification: DOCa (Denominación de Origen
Calificada, or “Qualified Denomination of Origin”).
   Priorat is what I like to call a “new old” wine region. Vines grew here for centuries
before the ancient Romans arrived to mine lead and silver. But in the 1800s, the region
was progressively abandoned. In the wake of phylloxera, it barely recovered. By the
1970s, the population had dwindled so much that the inhabitants in many villages were
mostly the elderly. However, now Priorat has been reborn.
    The region acquired its name during the Middle Ages when, as the story goes, a
villager had a vision of angels ascending and descending a stairway to heaven. (So much
for Led Zeppelin…) As a result, in 1163, Alfonso II of Aragón founded a Carthusian
monastery on the spot. The monastery became known as Scala Dei (“God’s stairway”),
and given the important presence of the monks, the region was called Priorato, from the
Spanish word for priory. Today, although the monastery has been long abandoned, the
little hamlet nearby is still known as Scala Dei, and one of the region’s bodegas, Cellers de
Scala Dei, operates in some of the old buildings that once belonged to the monastery. The
wines from Cellers de Scala Dei have improved greatly in the past decade, and their wine
called Cartoixa (the word means “charterhouse” in Catalan and is another name for a
Carthusian monastery) is now one of the best in the region.

                            THE QUICK SIP ON PRIORAT
         THE BEST WINES OF PRIORAT are all red. Low-yielding old vines produce dense,
         inky wines that are some of the most powerful in Spain.
         PRIORAT’S TWO NATIVE red grapes, garnacha and cariñena (known in France as
         grenache and carignan, respectively), are the region’s main grapes and make intense,
         ageworthy wines.
         PRIORAT’S RUGGED, mountainous terrain includes a distinctive stony, black slate soil.

   The region’s most famous wines are all red and, when they are top notch, they are some
of the most intense, inky, and powerful red wines in Spain. Massively structured, with
considerable tannin that makes them ageworthy, they have thick, soft textures and are
loaded with ripe blackberry fruit, dense chocolate, lively licorice, and mineral/rock
flavors. The wines’ concentration is a result of painfully low-yielding old vines
(sometimes more than a century old), which protrude, gnarled and contorted, from the
poor, stony, slate-laced soil called llicorella (“licorice”) because of its blackish color. Days
here are intensely hot; nights, very cool. In this dry, infertile, unforgiving landscape, few
crops other than grapevines and olive trees have ever survived.
    And perhaps for that reason, site and vintage are very important in Priorat. From a poor
site or in an extremely hot vintage (or just when poor winemaking is at work), the wines
can be aggressive and severe, with bite-your-head-off tannin and volatile acidity.




                   Like many vines in Priorat, those of Mas Doix are 75 to 100 years old.

   The 4,700 acres (1,900 hectares) of vineyards are scattered over a valley and up slopes
more than 3,000 feet (900 meters) in elevation. Since much of the terrain is mountainous,
many of these old vineyards are planted on terraces built centuries ago. Although the slate
slopes are slippery and the heat in summer can be blistering, the vineyards are still worked
by hand, with only mules and horses for assistance. Tractors haven’t been invented that
could negotiate such vineyards as these.
    Priorat’s wines are based primarily on two native red grapes, garnacha and cariñena
(known in France as grenache and carignan, respectively). With the notable exceptions of
Châteauneuf-du-Pape and the rest of the southern Rhône in the Old World, and Australia
in the New World, garnacha and cariñena achieve their greatest heights in their homeland,
Spain. Not surprisingly, in Priorat they have excelled for more than a century. Garnacha
from the best vineyards here makes complex, luscious wines. For their part, the best
cariñena vineyards result in wines with a sexy, sweaty, earthy quality that is undeniably
appealing. In addition to these two varieties, some wines also contain smaller amounts of
cabernet sauvignon, merlot, syrah, and tempranillo.
 The ancient village of Vilella Baixa is perched on cliffs above the point where the Montsant River meets the stream of
 Scala Dei. The houses in the village are 7 or 8 stories high, with the main door on the 4th or 5th floor. All around the
                                             town are old hillside vineyards.

   Unlike the wines of Rioja or Ribera del Duero, the wines of Priorat are not categorized
according to the hierarchy of crianza, reserva, and gran reserva. Nor, with few
exceptions, are they ever aged in American oak (French oak is preferred). France has also
inspired many of the wines’ names. Clos Mogador, Clos de l’Obac, Clos Erasmus, and
Clos Martinet all borrow the French concept of a clos, or a small, defined vineyard where,
by inference, special high-quality wines are made. Most, but not all of the wine is dry;
several Priorat bodegas also make sweet, fortified red wines called vis dolçes (Catalan for
“sweet wines”). These sweet bombs, with their syrupy texture and flavors of chocolate-
covered cherries, can be simply extraordinary and are priced accordingly.
   Until the 1990s there were very few independent bodegas in Priorat. Because the
vineyards were difficult to work and the region was isolated and poor, most vineyards
were just small plots tended by farmers who worked the difficult ground by hand, usually
with the sole help of a donkey. The farmers sold their grapes to the local cooperatives, and
the cooperatives, in turn, made high-octane, rustic reds that were short on finesse.
   Then, quietly, beginning in the early 1990s, a few ambitious growers as well as
visionary winemakers decided that the region’s potential for producing truly fine wine was
just too great to ignore. Among the first pioneering bodegas to be founded were Costers
del Siurana, Clos Mogador, Clos Martinet, Clos Erasmus, and Alvaro Palacios, the latter
two of which, in particular, have built stellar global reputations for their complex,
ageworthy, expensive wines. Clos Erasmus (owned by self-taught winemaker Daphne
Glorian) makes profoundly spellbinding, rich wines that dance and move on the palate in
waves of flavor. The wine is one of the most extraordinary expressions of garnacha
anywhere. From Alvaro Palacios come two of the leading collector’s wines from Priorat:
the hugely concentrated and lush L’Ermita, made from 100 percent garnacha, and its
(theoretically) less powerful little brother, Finca Dofí, although Finca Dofí, a blend of
garnacha, cabernet sauvignon, syrah, and merlot, is massive and complex itself. The
arrival of these pioneers—with their skill, energy, and ambition—turned Priorat
completely around. One statistic sums up the story. According to the Priorat Consejo
Regulador, between the mid-1980s and the mid-1990s, the price of a donkey rose 10,000
percent.
                               THE GRAPES OF PRIORAT
 Priorat is home to red grapes almost exclusively, although some garnacha blanca is grown.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Used as an important blending grape, although usually in small amounts, in
 wines based primarily on cariñena and garnacha. Contributes structure.
 CARIÑENA: A native Spanish grape and one of the two major grapes in Priorat, the other being
 garnacha, with which cariñena is blended. From the best vineyards and the oldest vines, it contributes
 intensity, depth, and concentrated fruit flavors. Known as mazuelo in Rioja, and as carignan in France.
 GARNACHA: Along with cariñena, with which it is usually blended, one of the two major red grapes in
 the region. Contributes richness, juiciness, body, and density. Although it is a native Spanish grape,
 garnacha is better known in France, where it is called grenache. The white mutation of the grape,
 garnacha blanca, makes some straightforward white wines that are produced in very small amounts.
 MERLOT: A minor grape used as part of the blend in wines based on cariñena and garnacha. Adds
 structure and roundness.
 SYRAH: Like merlot, a minor grape used as part of the blend in wines based primarily on cariñena and
 garnacha. Adds depth and earthiness.
 TEMPRANILLO: A minor grape used for blending. Contributes aroma and acidity.

   Today, Priorat boasts more than ninety small bodegas. In addition to the pioneering
bodegas mentioned above, the top Priorat producers include: Mas Doix, Mas Igneus, Nit
de Nin, Celler Cal Pla, Celler Vall Llach, Clos Figueras, Mas Romani, Cellers Ripoll Sans,
and Ferrer Bobet.
   Finally, Priorat is almost completely encircled by another wine region to know—
Montsant (the name means “holy mountain”). Montsant is a bit like Priorat’s younger
sibling. The vineyards of Montsant are generally lower in elevation than those of Priorat,
and the wines are often not quite as complex. But Montsant wines are grown on similar
granitic slate soils and, like Priorat, based on old-vine garnacha and cariñena grapes. No
surprise, then, that Montsant’s wines taste and feel a lot like the wines of Priorat, albeit
usually at lower prices. Monsant wines such as Capçanes or Joan d’Anguera, for example,
are terrific for their prices.

                            WHEN YOU VISIT… PRIORAT
         PRIORAT IS AN EASY DAY TRIP from Barcelona or the city of Lleida, but to immerse
         yourself in its rugged remoteness, book one of the few hotels in Priorat’s main town,
         Gratallops. Most of Priorat’s other ten towns are very tiny (often with fewer than twenty-
         five inhabitants), but each has small wineries.
         DO NOT MISS SCALA DEI, the monastery that started it all.
                            The Priorat Wines to Know
The best Priorat wines, like those below, are not for the timid. These are full throttle, deep dives into intense flavor.
They are massively structured, complex reds that make it seems as though the earth herself has woken in a torrent
of rage.




                                             CELLERS RIPOLL SANS

                                                  CLOSA BATLLET
               60% cariñena, 20% garnacha, 10% cabernet sauvignon, plus merlot and syrah
Like many of the young vintners in Priorat today, Marc Ripoll left the region the first chance he got, but was
ultimately drawn back. In 2000, Ripoll returned to his family’s old vineyards near the village of Gratallops in order
to restore them, and in the process, he founded Cellers Ripoll Sans. His very first vintage was a rich, delicious wine
that, ten years later, had developed quite a seductive character. Indeed, wines such as Batllet (based on grapes from
vines nearly ninety years old and grown on slate hillsides) show the kind of stateliness, purity, and complexity that
fine Priorat achieves. (Before Ripoll returned to take over, his parents had sold the grapes for next to nothing to the
local co-op.)
                                                ALVARO PALACIOS

                                                     FINCA DOFÍ
                 Garnacha, cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and syrah, unspecified percentages
One of the young pioneers of Priorat when he arrived at the region’s largely abandoned vineyards in the early
1980s, Alvaro Palacios seemed to know intuitively which old plots would yield the most expressive, complex
wines. Palacios’s intense and precise L’Ermita ranks with the best wines in Spain. But L’Ermita’s little brother,
Finca Dofí, has also set the sommelier world on fire. The wine is contrapuntal in every way—rich yet with a rocky,
lean edge; refined yet muscular; spicy yet coalesced around a puddle of fruit. It’s the inherent sense of opposites
that makes the wine so intellectually intriguing.




                                                     SCALA DEI

                                                      CARTOIXA
                     40% garnacha, 25% cariñena, 25% cabernet sauvignon, 10% syrah
I love this wine’s peaty, rich, sweet, licoricey blackness, and the way its rocky firmness yields ever so gently to the
violet notes that dance through the flavors. The first sip of a Priorat wine is often so dramatic that it’s easy to forget
to pay attention to what comes next. With this wine, what comes next is a beautiful rush of flavors suggestive of tar
and soil, and a kind of crunchy sea-saltiness that calls out for grilled beef. The famous Scala Dei (“God’s stairway”)
monastery where this wine is made was founded in 1163 by Carthusian monks. The name of the wine, Cartoixa,
means “charterhouse,” which is itself another name for a Carthusian monastery.
                                                   MAS IGNEUS

                                                      IGNEUS
                           60% garnacha, 30% cariñena, 10% cabernet sauvignon
When young, Mas Igneus, like most Priorat wines, is a ruggedly masculine behemoth—a wine that’s so dense it’s
like a black hole of dark figs, black licorice, and black slate flavors. But with time, the massiveness melts away and
the wine emerges as something superbly structured and majestic. All this said, Igneus—even when young—is a
fantastic experience, especially in winter, and especially between bites of slow-roasted meat. The estate itself was
the first organically certified estate in Priorat, and the vines for this wine are more than sixty years old.
                                                 CLOS ERASMUS

                                    Approximately 70% garnacha, 30% syrah
Clos Erasmus is in a league by itself—the only wine that comes close is Alvaro Palacios’s L’Ermita. What I find so
extraordinary about the wine is its incredible freshness and liveliness, as if hard, black slate rock all of a sudden
went fluid and danced. Each time I’ve drunk it, I feel I can’t write fast enough, as chocolate, spices, licorice, fig,
cherry, citrus, jam, and earth swirl together in a huge, whirling vortex of flavor. Rather amazingly for all this
intensity, the wine has a minerally, slatey coolness that keeps it from being overwrought. And the thick, silky
texture is supple and sublime. Clos Erasmus was begun by self-taught winemaker Daphne Glorian, one of the
original five pioneers of modern Priorat in the 1980s.
In the Basque region, the txakoli vineyards of the Getaria district seem almost to hover over the Bay of Biscay in the
                                                   Atlantic Ocean.
OTHER IMPORTANT
WINE REGIONS

 THE BASQUE REGION | BIERZO | CALATAYUD AND CAMPO DE BORJA |
         CASTILLA-LA MANCHA | JUMILLA | RUEDA | TORO
                                 THE BASQUE REGION

In terms of both food and wine, the Basque region, in northern Spain, is fantastically
idiosyncratic and highly celebrated. Here, just waiting for the adventurous eater/drinker,
are a wealth of delicious things found nowhere else in the country.
   The region itself lies on the Bay of Biscay, on the Atlantic coast, extending to the
mountainous border with France. Vineyards spill down dark, rocky limestone cliffs, often
virtually cantilevered over the icy, slate-gray ocean below. It’s no surprise that the most
important wine here is white and crisp and made for seafood.
   Brace yourself for the wine’s name: txakoli (sha-ko-LEE). Alas, it is also referred to in
Basque as txakolina (technically, “place of txakoli”); and chacoli, as it is sometimes
written in Spanish and in French. The word comes from the Arabic chacalet, meaning
“thinness.” (We’ll get to how sleek the wine is in a minute.)
   Txakoli is made from the indigenous white grape called Hondurrabi zuri. Zuri means
“white” in Basque; Hondurrabi is a village near the French border. There’s also a red
variety called Hondurrabi—Hondurrabi beltza (beltza means “black”)—although this red
grape is not related to the white, but instead may be another son of cabernet franc.
   Once I got used to pronouncing txakoli, I felt I could take on the three main types:
txakoli de Getaria, txakoli de Vizcaya, and txakoli Alava (from the small districts of
Getaria, Vizcaya, and Alava, respectively).




 In the Basque region, tapas are called pinxtos and are speared with a toothpick. You pay at the end by counting your
                                                      toothpicks.

    The wine itself has no parallel when it comes to bracing acidity. (Txakoli makes
Champagne seem soft.) Dry as a bone, and extremely sleek on the palate, txakoli is often
slightly carbonated and is served in a unique manner called “breaking.” To break txakoli,
the wine is poured from a height of several feet/meters into a little tumbler glass
(splashing some on the floor seems to be standard operating procedure). The flight
through the air is said to open up the txakoli and make it smell and taste more vivid.
   The most renowned txakoli is Txomin Etxaniz. And now I dare every sommelier out
there to say Txomin Etxaniz Txakolina de Getaria three times fast.
                                       BIERZO

Bierzo is a remote, mountainous region in the province of León, within Castilla y León, in
northwestern Spain. To the west is the region of Galicia (and its primary wine
denomination, Rías Baixas). Indeed, the climate of Bierzo mingles some of the maritime
influences of Galicia with the dry, hot, continental climate of the high plains of Castilla.
  Like many of the wine regions of northern Spain, Bierzo’s wine history dates to ancient
Roman times, when the area was the largest gold mining center on the Iberian Peninsula.
Ancient Roman mining sites are still visible in the area, one of the most spectacular being
Las Médulas, a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
   Soils in this mountainous region include mixtures of slate and quartz, which are
thought to contribute to the unique flavor of the wines produced here. The main variety is
mencía (men-THEE-a), a wildly spicy, gamey, minerally, dramatic red that, to me, often
seems poised somewhere between syrah and pinot noir. For several years this fascinating,
indigenous Spanish variety was said to have been brought from Bordeaux, where it was
probably related to cabernet franc. Recent DNA typing, however, shows this to be untrue,
although the exact parents of mencía are not known.
                         HIT BY A THOUSAND METEORITES?




  In the arid, windy region of Geria on Lanzarote (one of the Canary Islands), the rocky volcanic soil traps moisture
    in the desertlike climate. Some of the original vine cuttings brought from Spain to the Americas were from vines
                                             growing on the Canary Islands.
 On Lanzarote, the easternmost island of Spain’s Canary Islands, are more than ten thousand curious,
 dark pits spaced closely together. From a distance, it looks as if the entire region has been hit by
 thousands of meteorites. But in fact, these are some of the most bizarre vineyards in the world—
 vineyards that are an ingenious response to the island itself.
     Lanzarote, and its most important wine district, La Geria, lie just 78 miles (130 kilometers) off the coast
 of Africa. Rainfall here is less than in some parts of the Sahara desert. In the 1700s, a volcanic eruption
 covered the island, including the best farming land, with ash and lava. Instead of giving up, local farmers
 invented a dry cultivation method called enarenado (literally, “covered with sand”). As it turns out, the
 island’s volcanic soil, called picón, is extremely good at absorbing and retaining moisture from the night
 air. To capture that moisture, each vine is individually planted in a hole about 13 feet (4 meters) wide and
 6 feet (2 meters) deep. The pit is then filled with the hard granules of picón. These rocks are so
 absorbent that they can even draw water from a cloud passing by overhead. The pits are surrounded by
 2-foot-(half-meter-) tall semicircular stone walls called zocos. The pits and the walls help to protect the
 vines (which, untrellised, spread along the ground laterally) from strong winds that blow in from the
 Atlantic Ocean across the Canary Islands.
    Today, Lanzarote’s vineyards are planted primarily with malvasia grapes—an ancient, hardy variety.
 Indeed, malvasia, along with listan prieto (known as mission in the United States) were the grapes
 brought by Spanish explorers from the Canary Islands to Mexico in the 1500s. From Mexico, these
 grapes became the foundation of the wine industries in Chile, Argentina, and the U.S.

   Bierzo was launched on the modern Spanish wine scene in 1998, when famous Spanish
winemaker Alvaro Palacios (who helped reestablish the Priorat region) began buying
ancient vineyards near the village of Corullón. Palacios and his nephew Ricardo Pérez
eventually established a tiny jewel of an estate, Descendientes de José Palacios, today
considered among the best in the region. Another bodega to watch: the single estate (pago)
Luna Beberide.
                 CALATAYUD AND CAMPO DE BORJA

Southeast of Rioja lie the two small, neighboring denominations of Calatayud and Campo
de Borja. While they are separate DOs, I have chosen to address them together, for
together these are Spain’s equivalent of Châteauneuf-du-Pape—mini empires of
astoundingly great garnacha.
   The landscape of each is forbidding—high-altitude (1,000 to 3,000 feet (300 to 900
meters above sea level), dry-brush-strewn hills that look like they could be in the U.S.
state of Nevada. The soils—a friable type of red and black slate—are interspersed with
limestone, iron, and clay. Wild thyme and rosemary cling to the hot slate and give the air a
refined, herbal, garigue-like aroma.
   Fifty years ago, there was ten times as much vineyard acreage in Calatayud as there is
today, and considerably more in Campo de Borja as well. But in the 1980s, the European
Union provided generous grants to growers willing to grub up their vineyards here. Just
over 9,000 acres (3,600 hectares) still exist in Calatayud; 18,000 acres (7,200 hectares) in
Campo de Borja.
   The grenaches of Calatayud and Campo de Borja are not delicate, restrained wines.
Black, dense, chewy, and lip-smacking, they have irresistible, big thrusts of kirsch-berry
fruit, minerals, and spice. (When is too much not enough?)
   And although each is primarily a red wine region, some amazing whites are made,
including zesty, aromatic macabeos from Calatayud vines more than fifty years old.
   Among the wineries to watch for are Baltasar and Las Rocas, in Calatayud, and Borsao
and Alto Moncayo, in Campo de Borja.




   Windmills in Alcázar de San Juan, in Castilla-La Mancha, the setting for much of the famous novel Don Quixote.
                          CASTILLA-LA MANCHA

Forming a semicircle south of Madrid, on the spectacular, grand high plateau of central
Spain (the meseta), is the region known as Castilla-La Mancha. While enormous amounts
of Spanish wine are made here, the region is, alas, somewhat better known to foreigners
for its leading fictional character—Don Quixote.
   Castilla-La Mancha is one of the largest wine regions in the world (one hundred times
larger than Napa Valley, for example). Historically, it has been to Spain what the
Languedoc-Roussillon has been to France—the comforting, dependable spigot for oceans
of tasty, inexpensive wine. Today, the region is undergoing a transformation, as dozens of
high-quality-oriented family wineries step up their game. Indeed, it is here, on these vast
plains, that most of Spain’s pagos—exemplary small estates devoted to top-notch wine—
are to be found. But even the region’s numerous cooperatives are making better wines than
ever before.
    Castilla-La Mancha has many natural assets as a wine region. The region is high in
altitude—up to 3,500 feet (1,100 meters) above sea level. The nights are cool, thanks to
huge diurnal temperature fluctuations. The days are sunny and dry. The soils are
permeated by limestone (a somewhat shocking fact for those who associate limestone
solely with Burgundy and Champagne). Many of the vines are old—sixty to eighty years
is not uncommon. And to cap it all off, the wines remain steals in terms of their prices.
   Thanks to what are more or less ideal viti-cultural conditions, more than forty grape
varieties are grown—from indigenous varieties such as the white airén and the reds bobal
and monastrell, to well-known Spanish varieties such as tempranillo, to global varieties
like viognier, syrah, and cabernet sauvignon. (Speaking of global tendencies, one of the
most surprising white wines from here is a blend of viognier, chardonnay, and riesling,
which, as blends go, sounds like a train wreck, but is surprisingly delicious given the
elegance of the local viognier and chardonnay.)
    While I’ve had many delicious wines from this region recently (including some of
Europe’s best 100 percent petit verdots), I’d like to say a final word about airén, one of the
leading grape varieties in the entire world in terms of production. For most of the
twentieth century, airén was a wine you’d find in Spain’s grittiest bars, and in places like
truck stops. Lots of it was distilled into cheap brandy, and much of it is still sent to other
countries in the European Union to be blended into sparkling wine. But today, dozens of
producers in Castilla-La Mancha, convinced that airén can be more, are making it
carefully, with an eye toward top quality. The result is a slew of new, fresh, racy, fruity,
minerally airéns (still, not sparkling) that are terrific as every-night dinner whites. In a
blind tasting, one of these airéns compared to, say, a typical, easily affordable pinot grigio,
is no contest. The airén will win every time.
In Castilla-La Mancha, houses cling to the cliffs of the mesata, the vast, rocky plateau of central Spain.
                                      JUMILLA

Many of Spain’s exciting emerging wine regions are in the north. But Jumilla (pronounced
who-ME-ah), south of Madrid and 50 miles (80 kilometers) inland from the Mediterranean
coast, is a high-altitude, arid valley flanked by the southern towns Alicante, Albacete, and
Murcia. Although they are scorchingly hot during the day, the vineyards benefit from cool
nights, thanks to their location some 1,000 to 3,000 feet (300 to 900 meters) above sea
level.
   The main grape here is the red variety monastrell, a late-ripening variety that needs
considerable heat. While monastrell is indigenous to Spain, it was brought to southern
France, Australia, and California more than a century ago and rechristened mourvèdre or
mataró. (French mourvèdre continues to be better known than Spanish monastrell.) The
wines produced from it are usually rustic, easy-drinking, fruity, ripe, and lively, although
occasionally you find a very serious, complex example that can be stunning. They are
widely exported—often at bargain prices. Interestingly, in many of Jumilla’s vineyards,
these monastrell vines remain ungrafted (that is, on their own roots), phylloxera having
never penetrated the arid soils here. Small amounts of syrah, tempranillo, merlot, and
cabernet sauvignon are also grown—often for the purpose of blending with monastrell.
                                              RUEDA

Poised between the regions Ribera del Duero to the northeast and Toro to the west, Rueda
is one of the important, if small, white wine regions of Spain. Indeed, verdejo, the leading
white wine of the region is, in terms of the volume produced, Spain’s leading fine white
wine.
   Like Ribera del Duero, Rueda is spread over dramatic plateaus slashed by the Duero
River before it flows into Portugal. This is a region of extremely cold winters and
scorchingly hot summers. For centuries the principal grape was palomino, the heat-
tolerant grape of Sherry. The ponderous, high-alcohol Rueda wines that resulted were
turned into rather innocuous fortified wines that, sadly, never approached Sherry in
quality.




                Harvesting viura grapes in Rueda, one of the best white wine regions of Spain.

   Then, in the early 1970s, the historic Rioja firm Marqués de Riscal consulted with the
legendary French enologist Émile Peynaud and came to the startling conclusion that
Rueda (more than Rioja) had the potential to make lively white wines (Peynaud likened
them to white Bordeaux). By using verdejo, a native Rueda grape; making the wine in
temperature-controlled stainless-steel tanks; and bottling it young without wood aging,
Riscal produced a fresh, vibrant, minerally wine that had splashes of bitter almond and
herbal flavors, not unlike sauvignon blanc. Verdejo put Rueda on the map as an important
Spanish white wine region.
   Unusually for Europe, most Rueda wines are known primarily by their varietal name—
verdejo—rather than their place (Rueda). Wines labeled verdejo must contain at least 85
percent verdejo. Wines labeled Rueda (and there are some) are generally only 50 percent
verdejo, with viura, the white grape of Rioja, or sometimes sauvignon blanc or Palomino
making up the rest of the blend. In addition to Marqués de Riscal, other top producers
include Compañía de Vinos Telmo Rodríguez, Buil and Giné, Marqués de Griñon, Oro de
Castilla, and Viñedos de Nieva.




The church of Santa María la Mayor in Toro is one of the most classic examples of transitional Romanesque architecture
   in Spain. Constructed of limestone and later sandstone, it was begun in 1170 and finished in the mid-13th century.
               Among the artistic works inside is an unusual sculpture depicting a pregnant Virgin Mary.
                                         TORO

High on Spain’s central plateau, on the banks of the Duero River in the province of
Zamora, the small wine region of Toro encompasses slightly more than a dozen villages,
the leading one of which is also named Toro. As is true in nearby Ribera del Duero, the
climate here is dry and sunny, with very hot days and cold nights. Similarly, the soils here
are sandy and mixed with ancient riverbed stones.
   Toro is known for massively powerful, dense red wines based on tinta del Toro, locally
adapted clones of tempranillo. (Some garnacha is also grown, as is a small amount of the
white grape verdejo.) Often black in color, with a syrupy texture and flavors reminiscent
of bitter chocolate, tobacco, dried spices, and dirt (sounds awful; tastes good), the best
Toro wines come from old vineyards with vines that date back more than a century. But be
warned, poor-quality, inexpensive wines from this region can tear your head off with their
harsh tannin and high alcohol content.
    Among Toro’s most famous wineries are Campo Eliseo, a joint venture between the
international wine consultant Michel Rolland and the Lurton family of France; as well as
the grand winery Numanthia, today owned by the luxury group Moët Hennessey Louis
Vuitton (LVMH). Of the bodega’s 121 acres (49 hectares) of vineyards, half are composed
of vines planted seventy to two hundred years ago. Numanthia makes two of the greatest
cult wines in Spain: Numanthia Termanthia (which I call the “Burning Man” of red wine,
it’s so masculine) and the effortless-to-remember Numanthia Numanthia.
                                                                 PORTUGAL

                 PORT | MADEIRA | PORTUGUESE TABLE WINES
PORTUGAL RANKS TENTH AMONG WINE PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE
PORTUGUESE DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 13 GALLONS (48 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

More than any other western European country, Portugal has remained steeped in tradition
even as it has modernized. Grapes for certain wines are still painstakingly trodden by foot
in ancient stone lagares, and in the mountainous wine regions of the northeast, vineyards
are still worked entirely by hand. Dirt paths that were used for oxcarts a decade ago are
now, in some cases, sleek new highways (thanks to European Union membership and
billions of euros worth of infrastructure). But adjacent to those highways, the vineyards
remain almost exactly as they were centuries ago. The taste of Portugal’s wines is, in
many ways, the taste of a place where time has stopped.
    The persistence of tradition in Portugal is due in large part to the importance of Port,
Portugal’s most famous wine and a wine that, like Spanish Sherry and French Champagne,
is still meticulously handcrafted using ancient, artisanal methods. Port is a sweet,
powerfully fortified wine, the drinking of which can only be described as a turbocharged
experience. Since its evolution from the 1700s onward, it has been considered one of the
most remarkable wines in the world. Because it is indeed Portugal’s most extraordinary
wine, Port leads off the chapter, followed by Madeira, an equally spellbinding Portuguese
treasure. Finally, Portugal’s emerging class of good table wines should not be ignored.
While I won’t examine every one of Portugal’s eleven wine regions in this chapter, I will
look at the revolution in quality that is beginning to take place in the most important
regions, such as the Douro, Dão, Bairrada, and Alentejo.
   Harvesting grapes in the Douro Valley of Portugal. The steep, terraced vineyards make the work hard and slow.

    Portugal, like its Iberian neighbor, Spain, is carpeted with vineyards—almost 600,000
acres (242,800 hectares) of them. In fact, although the country is just 370 miles (595
kilometers) long, 125 miles (200 kilometers) wide, and smaller than the state of Kentucky,
it nonetheless ranks tenth in world wine production. Seventy-nine different grape varieties
grow here, many of which can be found in the Douro alone. Many of these varieties are
quite ancient and were probably brought to Portugal from Phoenicia (modern-day
Lebanon) or Anatolia (Turkey), which were among the primary domestication sites for
vines in the Old World. (As is true for Spanish grape varieties, Portuguese varieties are
thought to be genetically distinct from varieties in France and Italy.) Since those early
times, Portuguese vines have had to struggle formidably to survive. The varieties that exist
today, for example, have, through natural genetic mutation, adapted to the dry, severely
hot climate and impoverished landscape, and are surprisingly capable of producing well-
balanced, elegant wines despite the climate challenges. For an explanation of Portuguese
wine law, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 925.
The Douro Valley, with its ancient hand-built rock terraces, is one of the most magnificently beautiful wine regions in the
                                                         world.
An aerial view of the twisting Douro River and on its banks, Croft’s Quinta do Roeda, one of the great Port vineyards.
                 Founded in 1588, Croft is the oldest Port shipper still operating in the Douro today.
PORT

If Portugal is the mother of Port, Britain is certainly its father. The famous Port firms
were, for the most part, begun by men with such properly British names as Sandeman,
Croft, Graham, Cockburn, Dow, and Warre. British men, in fact, were not only Port’s
founders but also its most ardent, if exclusionist, advocates. In fact, until recently Port
might have been described as a rather sexist beverage. The quintessential man’s drink, it
was historically brought out (with great celebration and obligatory cigars) only after the
women had left the room. Needless to say, women don’t leave the room anymore (in fact,
in some countries, including the United Kingdom, most Port today is purchased by
women).
   Although the ancient Romans prized the juicy red wines from the steep banks of the
Douro River, in northeastern Portugal, centuries passed before the ingenious British
transformed these wines from simple, tasty quaffs into Port, Britain’s early version of
central heating. There is a fable about Port’s birth, even though in reality the wine’s
“invention” was more like a series of discoveries than a single creative act. As the
apocryphal story goes, two young English wine merchants were traveling through
Portugal in the late 1670s, looking for wines that would be saleable in the British market.
(At the time, escalating political rivalry between Britain and France meant that, in Britain,
French wines were increasingly met with great disfavor.) The two merchants supposedly
found themselves at a monastery outside the town of Lamego, near the Douro River. The
abbot there served them a wine that was smoother, sweeter, and more interesting than any
they’d tasted. When pressed to explain, the abbot confided that he’d added brandy to the
wine as it had fermented.

      The name Port is derived from the city of Oporto, a major port on the Atlantic
      at the mouth of the Douro River—the golden river. Oporto is the second
      largest city in Portugal, after Lisbon.
 Historically, barrels of Port were transported from the inland vineyards of the Upper Douro to Oporto on the coast in
                                narrow, shallow-bottomed boats known as barcos rabelos.

   What actually happened was far less fanciful. By the seventeenth century, wine was
regularly being fortified with grape spirits simply to make it more stable during the
voyage to England. At first the amount of spirits was small, about 3 percent. But then an
incredible vintage in the year of 1820 caused Port shippers to rethink their product. That
year the wine was remarkably rich, ripe, and naturally sweet. Sales soared. The next year,
hoping to recreate their success, Port shippers added more brandy and added it sooner, in
order to arrest fermentation earlier and leave more sweetness in the wine. The idea
worked. Gradually, over the course of many decades, the amount of grape spirits was
incrementally increased, producing a sweet wine that is substantially fortified at the same
time.

                                    THE QUICK SIP ON PORT
           THE SWEET FORTIFIED WINE known as Port is one of the most complex and
           ageworthy wines in the world.
           TRUE PORT IS MADE only in the Douro River valley of Portugal, an ancient, forbidding
           wine region where vineyards cling to steep slopes and where the summer heat is
           intense.
           PORT IS MADE in numerous styles, each of which is an extraordinarily different wine
           drinking experience.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Port comes from only one place in the world, the 70-mile-long demarcated Port region, in
the Douro River Valley, a region that is classified as a World Heritage site by UNESCO.
The Rio Douro begins near Madrid, in Spain (where it’s known as the Duero River), then
carves a westward path through the rugged high plains until it finally forges its way across
the border. In Portugal, the fjordlike river cuts a deep gorge through the arid, rocky,
unforgiving land, ultimately crossing the entire country and washing into the Atlantic at
the town of Oporto. The river is so massive that today, it supplies more than 30 percent of
all the hydroelectric power in Portugal.
   That vineyards are planted in the Douro is a testament to human will, for this is one of
the most unmerciful environments in which grapes manage to grow. From a distance, the
panoramic river valley appears as terraced amphitheaters of vines, stretched out as far as
one can see. The terraces—tall, narrow, and all handmade—are cut into the extremely
steep banks of schist that is occasionally interspliced by granite. These hardened rock
slopes originally contained so little soil that more had to be created by men who, almost
inconceivably, over generations and by hand, chipped at the rock with hammers and
pointed iron poles to break it down into small particles. (Later, blasting with dynamite
became the common method.)

      The forbiddingly steep hillsides of the Douro Valley range from 35 to 70
      degrees in inclination. Terrace walls can be 15 feet (4.6 meters) high. These
      are some of the cruelest vineyards to work in Portugal’s furnacelike summers.

   The presence of schist and granite is extremely important. Both drain water well, so the
vines’ roots must tunnel deeply (as far as 65 feet/20 meters down) within the rocky
crevices for water. Roots that burrow deep into the earth find a stable environment there
and thus become more stable themselves. This is critical in the Douro, where the vines
must be hardy and supplied with enough water to survive the blazingly hot daytime
temperatures.
    The Douro’s summers (“three months of hell,” as they are locally referred to) are
infamous. The temperatures can rise so high during the day—often to the hundred-teens
Fahrenheit (mid-forties Celsius) for weeks at a time—that the vines temporarily shut down
and wait until night to transport nutrients from the leaves to the grapes. The heat, luckily,
is dry, thanks to the Serra do Marão mountain range, which separates the Douro from
western Portugal’s cooler, more humid Atlantic climate.
   Vineyards planted with touriga nacional, one of the leading varieties in the Douro, and a variety that contributes
                                             considerable power to wine.


                THE MOST IMPORTANT PORTUGUESE WINES
                                              LEADING WINES
           ALENTEJO red and white
           BAIRRADA red DÃO red
           DOURO red
           MADEIRA white (fortified; dry and sweet)
           PORT red (fortified; sweet)

                                              WINES OF NOTE
           SETÚBAL white (fortified; sweet)
           VINHO VERDE white

    The hot climate, difficult terrain, and lack of paved roads also meant that, in the past—
in fact, until the 1950s—young wines (Ports-to-be) were made in the Douro by the
growers but then quickly transported down the river on colorful Phoenician-style boats
(barcos rabelos) to Oporto and its sister city, Vila Nova de Gaia (villa nova de GUY-a).
There, in a warren of warehouses known as lodges, the wines would be blended and
matured by the shippers. Today, most Port is still blended, aged, and bottled in the
shippers’ warehouses, although the wine itself is brought down from the Douro by tanker
trucks, a feat that hardly seems possible given the extremely narrow roads, hairpin turns,
and general absence of shoulders on roads that, in some places, barely cling to the cliffs.
                                  THE GRAPES OF PORT
                                               WHITES
 CÓDEGA, GOUVEIO, MALVASIA FINA, RABIGATO, AND VIOSINHO: Obscure grapes used for only
 one style of Port—white. Also used for table wines.

                                                 REDS
 SOUSÃO: Also known as vinhão. A darkly colored grape that retains its acidity well and is therefore used
 in small amounts to contribute a sense of freshness to the Port blend. (This is also the grape behind the
 best red vinho verdes.)
 TINTA BARROCA: The name means “black baroque.” Contributes alcohol, body, and an aroma and
 flavor reminiscent of chocolate. Like all of the Port grapes, it is also used for table wines.
 TINTO CÃO: The name, inexplicably, means red dog. The grape has a delicate character and
 sometimes contributes spiciness. Like all of the Port grapes, it is also used for table wines.
 TINTA RORIZ: Native to Spain, where it is known as tempranillo, it contributes body and red berry flavors
 and aroma. Like all of the Port grapes, it is also used for table wines.
 TOURIGA FRANCA: Contributes floral, violety aromas and a sense of richness on the mid-palate (in the
 same way that merlot is said to do in the making of Bordeaux wines). Also used for table wines.
 TOURIGA NACIONAL: Contributes color, tannin, structure, flavor, and aroma. Considered the cabernet
 sauvignon of Port grapes for its impressive structure. It is often used for its impact at the back of the
 palate. Also used for table wines throughout the country.

   Until the mid-1980s, maturing wines in the lodges was not just standard practice, it was
the law. In 1986, new regulations allowed Port to be aged, bottled, and shipped directly
from the farm estate (the quinta). As a result, several growers who had formerly sold to
large shippers—Quinta do Infantado, for example—began marketing their own Ports.
   There are more than 135,000 vineyard properties in the Douro. These are owned by the
shippers themselves, as well as the region’s roughly forty thousand growers, each of
whom owns, on average, no more than a scant acre of grapes. The region is divided into
three subzones, and vineyards are planted in all three. From the Atlantic heading inland, or
west to east, they are Baixo Corgo (Lower Corgo), Cima Corgo (Upper Corgo), and Douro
Superior. (The name Corgo is a general designation for the area around the Corgo River, a
main tributary of the Douro.)
   The Lower Corgo, about 60 miles (100 kilometers) upriver from Oporto, is where
basic-quality Ports are made. Better-quality Ports, including all vintage Ports, come from
either the Upper Corgo or Douro Superior. The latter extends east to the Spanish border.
   Despite these generalizations, the Douro remains difficult to categorize. Countless
mesoclimates, each independent from the next, are created by the twisting and turning of
the river, the changes in orientation to the sun, the variations in elevation (between 1,200
and 1,700 feet/370 and 520 meters), and numerous other factors. Vineyards may be close
as the crow flies but vastly different in terms of the quality of grapes they produce.
 Port is generally aged in large oak casks. Depending on the style of Port being made, the wine might spend as little as
                                     two years or as long as thirty years in barrels.


                                         THE TERM TOURIGA
     Grown in every wine region in Portugal, the grape touriga nacional is known by more than twenty
     different names, including simply touriga or tourigo. Unlike tinta which means red, the etymology of the
     word touriga is not clear, although it could be a reference to the small village Tourigo in the heart of the
     Dão, where the variety may have originated. Touriga nacional and its son, touriga franca, are now major
     grapes in the Douro, where they are used for Port production.

   In the early 1930s, in an attempt to make sense of all this and to figure out which
vineyards were superior (thereby determining which grapes should be used for Port
instead of table wine), a government commission rated the vineyards on a scale of A to F.
Today, these vineyards remain the most intricately appraised in the world. Each is given
points based on myriad factors, including altitude, type of soil, shelter from the wind,
orientation to the sun, climate, age of vines, varieties planted, density of planting, and
yield.
    As for grapes, Port is virtually always a blend of different varieties. Blending, in fact, is
what gives Port part of its complexity. While there are multiple dozens of both white and
red grape varieties grown in the Douro, five—all red—are considered the most important
for making Port. They are touriga franca, touriga nacional, tinta barroca, tinto cão, and
tinta roriz. Of these, touriga franca and touriga nacional are preeminent, the first because
of its finesse, richness, softness, and violet aroma; the latter because of its intense color,
tannin, and boldness.
   Yet, franca and nacional’s special attributes aside, all five varieties have one
characteristic in common. All are small-berried and thick-skinned, and are therefore able
to withstand the Douro’s heat spells and droughts. The small berries, of course, also mean
very little juice. At painfully low yields, such grapes make concentrated wines indeed.
                            THE TOP PORT SHIPPERS
         A. A. FERREIRA
         COCKBURN’S
         CROFT
         DOW’S
         FONSECA GUIMARAENS (aka Fonseca)
         GRAHAM’S
         NIEPOORT
         QUINTA DO INFANTADO
         QUINTA DO NOVAL
         QUINTA DO VESUVIO
         RAMOS PINTO
         SANDEMAN
         SMITH WOODHOUSE
         TAYLOR, FLADGATE & YEATMAN (aka Taylor’s)
         WARRE’S

   To make Port, the top five Douro reds may be blended together in any combination,
using any proportions. In most old vineyards, the blend is still “made” in the field—that is,
the different vines themselves are interplanted. Only in modern vineyards are varieties
kept separate.
                                  MAKING PORT

The condensed version would go like this: Add one part grape spirits to four parts
fermenting red wine. In truth, however, making Port is quite a bit more involved—and
fascinating.
   First, the red Port grapes are crushed. (Usually, this part of any winemaking story is
pretty ho-hum. Not with Port.) Historically, crushing was done exclusively by hand—or
rather, by feet—in lagares, shallow stone or cement troughs (about 2 feet/0.6 meters high)
large enough to hold about a day’s worth of picked grapes. After that exhausting day of
picking, male vineyard workers would don shorts, hop into the lagar (yes, they washed
their feet first), and tread the soupy, hot, purple mass of grapes for several hours. In the
early part of the evening the workers would link arms and march with great solemnity and
difficulty (the mass of grapes is very slippery) back and forth in military-style lines, to the
clapping beat of a foreman (the capataz), who called out a rhythm. But as the night wore
on, the time would come for the liberdade. This was the moment when the women—and
musicians—arrived. As the women jumped into the lagar, men chose partners and
everyone began to waltz, polka, or folk dance (depending on the music).




   Amazingly, in the Douro, some grapes are still trodden by human feet—indeed many
vintage Ports, in particular. I have fond memories (and pictures I’ll never reveal) of
dancing recently in the lagar at Quinta do Vesuvio until 2:00 a.m. Here’s what no one tells
you: Your legs are bright violet-colored for a month afterward.
   As it happens, the human foot is ideally suited to crushing grapes. Treading breaks the
grapes, crushes the skins, and then mixes the skins with the juice for good flavor and color
extraction—all without smashing the pips (the seeds), which contain bitter-tasting tannin.
       “Port wine cannot be produced in flat, easy vineyards. Here we engage in a
       fierce battle with the elements to produce top-quality wine with no help from
       God.”
                                                                       — ARMONDO ALMEIDA,
                                                                        grape grower for Sandeman

   But when electricity finally came to the Douro (in the 1970s!), the stage was set for a
revolutionary invention: the mechanical, or “robotic,” lagar. Invented by the Symington
family and first used for the 2000 harvest, the robotic treader is a large stainless-steel
trough with mechanical “feet” that plunge up and down through the grape skins, gently
crushing them. The mechanical feet are heated to 98.6°F (37°C), which is the natural
temperature of the human leg. These robotic lagares have profound advantages. Not only
can they run all night, but they can be tipped up and quickly emptied so the grape juice
and skins can be run off into a tank precisely when the treading is complete. Historically, it
took hours to do this by hand, and all that time the alcohol and tannin in the wine were
building. In Portugal recently, I blind tasted the same exact Port, a portion of which had
been foot trodden and the other portion trodden by mechanical lagar. Both were excellent,
but if I had to vote, I’d say the latter may have had a bit more richness, softness, and
density.




 Crushing grapes by foot. The workers initially march through the mush, but as the night wears on everyone breaks out
                                                    into dancing.


                              “PORTS” AROUND THE WORLD
     For decades, fortified wines made in the United States, Australia, and South Africa used the word Port on
     their labels, infuriating producers of authentic Port from the Douro River Valley of Portugal. As of the
     first decade of the twenty-first century, however, both Australia and South Africa have finally
     discontinued this practice out of respect for the original appellation. The United States remains the only
     major producer of “Port” not from Portugal.
   After the grapes have been trodden, the soupy mass is poured off into a tank so that
fermentation can begin to turn the grapes’ sugar into alcohol. At the same time, flavor,
color, and aroma are being extracted from the skins. Thirty-six hours into the process, at
the point when about half the natural sugar has been converted to alcohol, fermentation
must be stopped. Thus, compared to most red table wines, Port is given about half the
amount of time to ferment.
   To stop fermentation, the wine is poured off into a vat containing neutral grape spirits
(clear brandy) with an alcoholic strength of 77 percent (about 150 proof). The alcohol in
the spirits causes the yeasts in the wine to die, and fermentation subsides. The result is a
sweet wine with about 7 percent (70 grams per liter) residual sugar, fortified to about 20
percent alcohol.
                                    THE BIRTH PRESENT
 It is an old tradition among the wealthy British upper classes to give a newborn child a pipe (about sixty-
 one cases, clearly a lifetime’s supply) of Port from the newborn’s birth year (or from the nearest great
 vintage year). In the past, only vintage Port and single-quinta vintage Port would be given. These would
 be shipped in cask to a British wine merchant, who would bottle the Port, after which it would be stored in
 the parents’ cellar. By the time the child was old enough to drink, the Port would be matured and ready.
 Today the Port is bottled in Portugal, not Britain, but the tradition remains essentially the same.




                        Aging bottles of Port at the Graham’s lodge in Vila Nova de Gaia.

   Although this is the initial process by which all Port is made, it is only phase one.
Phase two—maturing and aging the Port—is just as critical, if not more so. Each lot of
Port is classified early, allowing each of the separate styles of Port to be matured and aged
differently.
                                THE STYLES OF PORT

Depending on how you count them and whether you include the rarest types, there are as
many as ten different styles of Port. While each is unique, their similar-sounding names
can make it frustrating to tell them apart and remember them all. So in this next section,
we’ll examine just the top five Port styles; these are the ones I think any wine lover would
want (or need) to know.
   To begin, I want to share with you a tip that Port expert Paul Mugnier taught me. All
Ports, he said, fall into one of two major categories: those that are more like crème brûlée
and those that are more like chocolate cake. (It’s kind of like dividing all meats into those
that are more like chicken and those that are more like beef.)
   The “crème brûlée” Ports are the ones that have been aged in wood a long time and
thus have had exposure to air through the staves of the barrel. These Ports have brown
sugar, almost crème brûléelike flavors. Tawny Port is the best example. (And, indeed, it
tastes delicious with crème brûlée.)
    The “chocolate” Ports have been aged a long time in bottle, with very little exposure to
air. They are darker and denser in flavor and color, retain their red berry characteristics,
and have an almost cocoalike or chocolaty flavor. Vintage Port is a perfect example of a
bottle-aged Port. (Not surprisingly, it tastes phenomenal with chocolate.)
   Given the above as a simple metaphor for thinking about the styles of Port in the
broadest terms, let’s now telescope down to the top five most important specific styles:
aged tawny Port, reserve Port, late-bottled vintage Port (aka LBV), vintage Port, and
single-quinta vintage Port.

                                   IS PORT EVER WHITE?
    Yes—although white Port represents only a small fraction of the total production of Port. White Port is
    not expensive and it’s not very complex. But it’s absolutely delicious drunk in the Portuguese way: mixed
    with tonic water and a twist of lime, on the rocks. In the Douro in summer, you can count on this
    refresher appearing every night around five, when everyone needs the Portuguese equivalent of a gin and
    tonic. White Port is made from the Douro grapes códega, gouveio, malvasia fina, rabigato, and viosinho.


AGED TAWNY PORT
Aged tawny Port gets my vote for the most sublime style of Port. Its flavors—toasted nuts,
brown sugar, and vanilla—are the adult version of cookie dough. And the texture of an
aged tawny is pure silk.
   Aged tawnies are blends of Ports from several years that are then kept for long periods
in barrel. They are labeled as either ten, twenty, thirty, or more than forty years old,
depending on the average age of the wines by flavor. In other words, a twenty-year-old
tawny Port tastes, to an experienced Port maker, like it is made up of wines that are about
twenty years old, but in fact aren’t necessarily that old.
          1963—a fine year for current drinking. Most Vintage Port is consumed after decades of aging.

   The wines used in the blend for an aged tawny are usually wines of the highest quality.
In fact, these wines often go into vintage Port in years when a vintage Port is declared (see
page 522). However, aged tawny Port and vintage Port taste nothing alike, since aged
tawny Ports are generally kept a minimum of ten years in barrel (until they become
tawny/auburn in color) and vintage Port spends only two years in barrel. Thus, aged tawny
Ports are often about finesse, while vintage Port is about power.
                                PORT’S FLAVOR PARADOX
 From a flavor standpoint, Port is one of the most paradoxical wines in the world. You would think that a
 wine made from very ripe grapes that have been grown in a severely hot climate (a wine that is then
 fortified with more alcohol!) would have thick, somewhat dull, raisiny flavors, and that the wine would be
 anything but fresh and lively. But great Ports are exactly that—fresh and vivid, often with “cool” blueberry
 and menthol flavors. Port winemakers attribute Port’s paradoxical freshness to the centuries of
 adaptation the local grapes have undergone. Even in blistering heat, these varieties have “learned” to
 hold on to their acidity. In addition, Port’s flavors are often given a tactile lift from a sense of minerality
 that Port winemakers say is evident in great years and may be in part related to the region’s schist soils.

  Aged tawny Ports are among the best-loved Ports in Portugal, France, and Britain,
where they are often drunk both as an aperitif and at the close of a meal.
   A quick word about a sister style called young tawny Port (as opposed to aged tawny
Port, described above). Basic and uncomplicated, young tawny is less than three years old
(which is almost oxymoronic, since the word tawny implies the wine has been aged long
enough for the color to brown). In the case of a young tawny, the grapes yield a lighter-
colored wine. The wine may then be made even lighter by minimizing the time the juice
stays on the skins during fermentation. Young tawnies, as a result, have a pale, onionskin
color. In Europe, they are often drunk straight up, or on the rocks as an aperitif, although
we don’t see them much in the New World.




RESERVE PORT
Reserve Port is an easily affordable, good-quality, “every-night” Port. (Up until 2002, this
was called “vintage character,” but the term was subsequently determined to be
confusing.) Reserve Ports have bold, red berry flavors that make them popular in the
United States and Britain. Many have proprietary names. For example: Dow’s AJS,
Fonseca’s Bin 27, Graham’s Six Grapes, Sandeman’s Founder’s Reserve, and Warre’s
Warrior, are all reserve Ports. Reserve Ports are blends of good—but not great—quality
wines that, on average, have spent four to six years aging in barrels before they are bottled
and released.




 Stacked barrels of Port in the old cellars of Warre’s. Established in 1670, the firm was initially known as Burgoyne &
 Jackson. Besides wines, it exported Portuguese olive oil and fruit to England, while importing dried cod and English
                                                woolen goods to Portugal.
                               THREE SPECIALTY STYLES
 There are three other, rather rare styles of Port that you may occasionally encounter. Each is a
 fascinating and rare drinking experience.

                                        COLHEITA PORT
 A tawny Port from a single vintage is called a colheita (col-YATE-ah) Port. It must be aged a minimum of
 seven years. In practice, many shippers release colheitas after they are ten, twenty, or even fifty years
 old. Colheitas are the rarest among rare Ports.

                                         CRUSTED PORT
 First made by British merchants who mixed together the leftover dregs from barrels of vintage Port and
 then aged it, crusted Port is designated as such because it leaves a heavy crust, or sediment, in the
 bottle. This is simply a gutsy, full-bodied, working man’s Port, made from a blend of several different
 years (the average age of the wines in the blend is three to four years) that has been bottled unfiltered.
 As a result, it throws a sediment and must be decanted.

                                     GARRAFEIRA PORT
 Garrafeira (garra-FAY-ra) Ports come from a single exceptional year and are aged briefly in wood and
 then a long time—as many as twenty to forty years—in large glass bottles called bonbonnes. After aging,
 the garrafeira is decanted and transferred into standard 750-milliliter bottles and sold. This type of Port
 has the richness of a vintage Port yet the suppleness of an aged tawny. The word garrafeira means “wine
 cellar” or “bottle cellar” (from the Portuguese garrafa—“bottle”). The term garrafeira is also used to
 designate nonfortified Portuguese table wines of especially high quality.


LATE-BOTTLED VINTAGE PORT
Late-bottled vintage Ports—often called LBVs—are moderately priced Ports that are
made every year and, yes, come from a single vintage. But the grapes don’t come from the
crème de la crème of grapes (in great years, those grapes go into vintage Port, the sine qua
non). LBVs have been aged in the barrel for four to six years and then bottled. (So, they
spend more time in barrel than vintage Port, but less time in bottle; see Vintage Port,
below.) LBVs, importantly, are what most good restaurants serve. They are ready to drink
when the shipper releases them, and require no decanting.
   LBVs are satisfying, luscious wines, to be sure, but tasted side by side with a vintage
Port, it would be clear to anyone that vintage possesses more richness, complexity, and
sophistication. A small subset of LBV is called “traditional late-bottled vintage Port” or
“bottle-matured late-bottled vintage Port.” (I know; it can seem confusing to have so many
names.) Unlike regular LBVs, these are not filtered and will therefore throw a sediment
and need to be decanted.

VINTAGE PORT
Here it is: the style of Port that every wine lover hopes to experience (more than once!).
No Port is more sought after—or expensive. Vintage Port represents only about 3 percent
of the total production of Port. It is made only in exceptional years when Port shippers
“declare” a vintage. All of the grapes in the blend will come only from that vintage, and
only from the very top vineyards.
                                 DECLARING A VINTAGE
 The process of making a vintage Port begins with a judgment. How good were the grapes from this year?
 If they were excellent, if they possessed just the right structural balance, richness, power, and finesse,
 then a shipper will decide to “declare” the vintage. Each shipper makes this decision independently.
 However, the truly stunning years for vintage Port are usually those declared by 50 percent or more of all
 shippers. In the past hundred years, a vintage year for Port has been declared just twenty-five times.
    Once a shipper declares a vintage, a formal procedure ensues. Before the wine can be bottled, the
 shipper must submit its intention and samples of the wine to the Port Wine Institute for tasting and
 approval.
    The great vintage Port years from the second half of the twentieth century through the first decade of
 the twenty-first have been: 1955, 1958, 1960, 1963, 1966, 1970, 1975, 1977, 1980, 1983, 1985, 1991,
 1992, 1994, 1995, 1997, 2000, 2003, 2007, and 2011.

   Vintage Ports are first aged just two years in barrel, to round off their powerful edges.
Then—and this is the key—they are aged reductively (without oxygen) for a long time in
the bottle. During bottle aging, the vintage Port matures slowly, becoming progressively
more refined and integrated. A decade’s worth of aging is standard, and several decades
used to be fairly common. Indeed, Ports from the 1950s are still amazingly lively on the
palate (the 1955 Cockburn’s is one of the most hauntingly luscious wines I have ever
tasted or felt… it was sheer silk).
    But the concept of aging vintage Port is also changing. Thanks to highly improved
viticultural and winemaking practices in the Douro, even very bold, young vintage Ports
can be lip-smackingly delicious. In recent trips to the Douro, I have been astounded by the
elegance of young vintage Port—its exuberance and power being, of course, givens.
    To maintain the intensity, balance, and richness of vintage Port, it is neither fined nor
filtered. This, coupled with the fact that Port grapes have thick skins and a lot of tannin,
means that vintage Port throws a great deal of sediment, and always needs to be decanted
(see Sediment and Tartrates, page 114). Finally, in the years a shipper chooses not to
declare as vintage quality, they take the grapes they might have used for vintage Port and,
if they came from a great single quinta (vineyard estate), bottle them under the name of
that quinta.
   Astonishment awaits. Older vintages of Graham’s, Dow’s, Warre’s, and other Ports are ready to be tasted in the
                                            Symington family lodges.


SINGLE-QUINTA VINTAGE PORT
The word quinta means farm, but in the Douro most quintas would be more accurately
described as renowned vineyard estates. They range in size from a dozen to several
hundred acres and usually include a house and sometimes gardens, in the manner of a
French château. The grapes for a single-quinta vintage Port come, as the name implies,
from a given quinta in a single year. The idea behind these Ports is that the very best
vineyard estates are often located in special mesoclimates that allow exceptional wines to
be made even in years when the vintage as a whole may not be declared.
    Single quintas may be owned by small shipper-firms, such as Quinta do Infantado,
which makes a single-quinta vintage Port by the same name. Or the quinta might be
owned by a large shipper. The famous Quinta do Vesuvio, for example, is owned by the
Symington family, which also owns the firms Graham’s, Warre’s, and Dow’s. But in all
cases, a single-quinta vintage Port will always be made exclusively from the grapes grown
at that quinta. (Remember that, by contrast, a vintage Port may come from grapes from
several quintas, as well as grapes grown by dozens of small, individual grape growers.)
It’s important to note that shippers may decide not to make a single-quinta vintage Port in
the same year they make a vintage Port. In years declared for vintage Port, the quinta’s
grapes may be blended into the vintage Port and thus cannot be made into a wine of their
own.
                            PORT’S CLASSIC PARTNERS
         Port has several classic companions, all of which are, like Port itself, profoundly
         flavorful: blue cheese, chocolate, roasted nuts, and crème brûlée. Vintage Port, for
         example, is stellar with blue cheese—especially Stilton or Gorgonzola—although
         mountain cheeses from Portugal (most of which have the word serra in the name) are
         also extraordinary. Hedonists also pair vintage Ports (as well as LBVs) with anything
         made from bittersweet chocolate. Indeed, fine chocolate is such a complex flavor that
         Port is virtually the only wine that stands up to it. As for tawnies, these Ports are
         explosively scrumptious when paired with almond or walnut cakes or with crème brûlée.
         But my favorite pairing with tawny is the orange tea cake served every afternoon at the
         Symington family’s Malvedos Estate.

   Apart from blending, single-quinta vintage Ports are made in the same manner as
vintage Ports. They are not filtered, require significant bottle aging, and throw a sediment,
so that the wine must eventually be decanted. Single-quinta vintage Ports are usually
released after two years, just like vintage Ports. The wines are then aged a decade or more
by the buyer. Single-quinta vintage Ports are generally slightly less expensive than vintage
Ports.
Port—served from a decanter—was a fixture in upper-class life in Britain in the 19th and early 20th centuries. The
                              lower classes made do without the decanter.
                   BLOODY HELL, COLLEGE WAS BRUTAL
Alas, it wasn’t this way for me (or you either, probably), but in England historically, wine—and especially
Port—played a notable part in college life. According to the Rare Wine Company (an importer/retailer
specializing in Port and Madeira), in the early part of the nineteenth century, colleges had breathtakingly
enormous wine cellars, and there was ten times as much Port in those cellars as any other wine. Far
from being a mere hedonistic indulgence, Port was “currency”—often used by students to pay off wages,
bets, and fines. Even after World War II, Port was still abundant in the cellars of universities like
Cambridge, which bought the wine by the pipe (a traditional Port barrel holding the equivalent of about
sixty-one cases), directly upon release, and then aged it for decades. Below is an excerpt from a
student’s letter, quoted in the 1949 edition of The Custom of the Room: Early Wine Books of Christ’s
College Cambridge.
   “On Friday we dined in the hall of Trinity College. Everything on a grand scale… After partaking of a
sumptuous dinner, which began at three, we retired with the fellows to the Combination Room, where we
sat soaking Port til eight or nine. Cards were then introduced, and the entertainment concluded with a
magnificent supper.”
     DECANTING, DRINKING, AGING, AND STORING
                      PORT

The only Ports that need decanting are those that throw a sediment. These include vintage
Port, single-quinta vintage Port, traditional late-bottled vintage Port, and crusted Port.
None of the other styles throw a sufficient sediment.
    Decanting Port is very easy. Since Port sediment is heavy relative to the sediment
thrown by other wines (see page 134 for more information on sediment), it tends to stick
to the sides of a bottle lying on its side in a cellar. So, all you need to do is handle the
bottle gently and pour slowly into the carafe or glasses, taking care not to shake up the
contents of the bottle. If possible, it’s helpful to stand the bottle of Port up for a day ahead
so that much of the sediment sinks to the bottom of the bottle.




                     The mind-blowing richness of Port starts with its hedonistic aromas.

    Depending on how old and delicate the wine is, it could be decanted many hours before
it is to be served—or just before. This is a judgment call to be sure, but it is better to err on
the side of less oxygen exposure, because the wine will get another big dose of oxygen
when it’s poured into the glasses.
   As for serving, one of the oldest and most curious Port traditions concerns the direction
in which a bottle is passed around the table. By custom, Port is always supposed to be
passed from the right to the left, in a clockwise direction. Although the origins of the
custom are obscure, research by the house of Sandeman suggests the practice is based on
the old Celtic belief that all circular motions should be deiseal, that is, turning in a way
such that a person moving in a circle would have his right hand toward the center. The
word deiseal is derived from the Celtic deas, meaning “right hand,” and iul, meaning
“direction.”
                                   THE FACTORY HOUSE
 Built from 1786 to 1790, the majestic Factory House in Oporto is one of the last “factories” of its kind in
 Europe. In its original sense, a factory was a trading association made up of merchants called factors.
 From the early 1500s onward, the British built impressive, fortresslike factory houses all along their trade
 routes, from London to Africa, India, and China. The factories served as members-only meeting places,
 where British merchants conducted business in wine, gold, ivory, and spices. Importantly, the factory
 house was also the center of British social life, and many factory houses, like the one in Oporto, have
 lavish dining rooms, dessert rooms, libraries, drawing rooms, map rooms, writing rooms, and ballrooms.
 Interestingly, until 1843, women were forbidden from dining at the Factory House (and therefore not
 allowed to enjoy the copious amounts of Port—plus Bordeaux and Champagne—that flowed during and
 after the members’ lengthy lunches and dinners). They were, however, always permitted to attend the
 balls, their presence there being somewhat more necessary. Today, thanks to consolidation within the
 Port industry, the Factory House in Oporto belongs to just a few Port shippers. To be a member, an
 individual must be British, and a director of a Port company. Members pay annual “dues” of twenty cases
 of vintage Port each year. And while the Factory House is not open to the public, the shippers who own it
 entertain frequently, allowing a considerable number of guest visitors to experience its history and
 splendor each year.

   Drinking Port is the easiest part. Any good-size wineglass will do. (The glass should be
large enough to allow the Port to be swirled.) Generally about 2¹ to 3¹ ounces (74 to 104
milliliters) of Port is poured in the glass—a slightly smaller amount, in other words, than
you would pour of a table wine.
   As for aging, some Ports are made so that they can be drunk right away; others will
mature and improve if stored well. The two main styles of Port that improve with age are
vintage Port and single-quinta vintage Port. These can be cellared a long time—as much
as three decades or more.
        HOW LONG WILL AN OPENED BOTTLE OF PORT LAST?
  Because Port is both fortified and sweet, an opened bottle lasts longer than an opened bottle of regular
  table wine. Precisely how long is dependent on a variety of factors including how old and fragile it is and
  whether or not it was exposed to considerable oxygen during its production. Here are some guidelines
  for the three leading styles:

  TYPE OF PORT                     WILL LAST

  Aged Tawny                       1 month to 6 months

  Late-Bottled Vintage             1 week to 1 month

  Vintage, Single-Quinta           From 1 day for an old, delicate vintage Port to 2 weeks or more for a
  Vintage                          younger, robust one




   Sandeman was founded in 1790 by George Sandeman, the son of a Scottish cabinetmaker. With a £30 loan from his
father and the goal of making a “modest fortune,” the younger Sandeman set up shop, ultimately establishing Sandeman
                                   as a leading producer of both Port and Sherry.
                              PORTUGAL’S NATIONAL DISH
          Dried salted cod—bacalhau—is Portugal’s national dish. Although the fish is also
          popular in Spain and the south of France, no place is more passionate about bacalhau
          than Portugal, where, it is said, there are at least a year’s worth of different recipes for
          it.
             By the time Columbus journeyed to America, the Portuguese were fishing for cod as
          far away as the Grand Banks of Newfoundland. The best bacalhau was salted at sea
          with sea salt from the area south of Lisbon, called Setúbal (an area also famous for its
          dessert wine), after which the salted cod would be dried onshore. The large, white,
          almost mummified fish can be seen hanging in bacalerias, shops that specialize in the
          fish. To prepare it, the fish is soaked for one to two days in several changes of water.
          This removes the salt and rehydrates the flesh. The fish is then cooked in any of a
          number of ways. In a very popular version, it’s flaked, then whipped and cooked with
          extra virgin olive oil, potatoes, fried onions, and cream, until it has a thick, creamy
          texture somewhere between that of scrambled eggs and mashed potatoes. In my own
          experience, the bacalhau occasionally served to guests who visit Quinta do Vesuvio
          comes as close to perfection as any cod dish in the world.



                               THE BOTTLE’S BEGINNINGS
    We have grown so used to bottled wine that we perhaps forget that wine bottles are a relatively recent
    invention. For most of wine’s history, it was sold (and often consumed) directly from the barrel. The first
    wine in the world to be successfully sold in cylindrical bottles was Port, sometime around 1775. Indeed,
    the advent of the cylindrical bottle permitted the style of vintage Port to be born, since the wine could now
    be laid down in bins for long periods of maturing and aging in the bottle.

   All other Ports—tawny, reserve, and late-bottled vintage—are ready to drink when
released, although they can also be stored for about two years (or sometimes more)
without loss of quality. And here’s a visual cue to aging: Ports that can be drunk right
away generally have a stopper-type cork (a cork with a cap on top of it). This will be
immediately obvious upon removing the foil. Ports that improve with age, such as vintage
Port, are sealed with a regular cork (the kind that requires a corkscrew). These should be
stored lying down. Notice that Port bottles themselves are generally black, to prevent
oxidation and help preserve the freshness of the Port should it be kept for significantly
long periods of time.

                            WHEN YOU VISIT… PORTUGAL
          VIRTUALLY all of the Port shippers have lodges in Vila Nova de Gaia, across the river from
          Oporto. Most offer fascinating tours in English, plus tastings.
          VISITING THE QUINTAS, far inland where the grapes are grown, is more difficult. Generally
          only members of the wine industry are allowed to do so. Plus, there aren’t many hotels—
          although, for anyone who loves wine, the Douro’s elegant vineyard estate and hotel known as
          Quinta da Romaneira is one of the most luxurious hotels in the whole country and worth the
          long drive on the nightmarishly narrow, steep roads of the inner Douro.
                                      The Ports to Know
All of the wines below are blends of any combination of touriga nacional, touriga franca (these are usually the two
leading varieties), plus tinta barroca, tinta roriz, tinta amarela, tinto cão, and other traditional grapes that are
sometimes still interplanted in the vineyard. Often, the exact varietal breakdown of a wine is not available, and thus
it is not listed below. (Instead, many shippers provide statistics on the percentage of a variety planted, as opposed to
the percentage of that variety used in the wine.) In any case, the percentage of each grape variety used varies each
year.
   Note that the labels on Port bottles always refer to Porto, the Portuguese word for Port.




                                               TAYLOR FLADGATE

                                               10-Year-Old Tawny Port
A scrumptious tawny, full of walnut, brown sugar, and vanilla flavors, yet still young enough to have hints of spicy
berry flavors as well. Ten-year-old tawnies are generally less complex than twenty-year-olds, but they can make up
for it, as this one does, with zesty flavors. Taylor is also renowned for its rich, powerful vintage Ports and the
stunningly delicious single-quinta Port, Quinta de Vargellas.




                                                W. & J. GRAHAM’S

                                               20-Year-Old Tawny Port
The wines of Graham’s always evoke velvet and voluptuousness. Of all of the Port shippers, none is more
dependable for making wines that always possess a hedonistic, mind-blowing richness. This hauntingly good
twenty-year-old tawny is an example. You could tease apart the aromas and flavors (butter-roasted nuts, brown
sugar, exotic spices, and crème brûlée) or you could just feel and sense the luxuriousness and be transported by the
complexity.
                                                 RAMOS PINTO

                                             Late-Bottled Vintage Port
One of the top Port shippers to be founded by a Portuguese family, Ramos Pinto makes some of the richest, raciest
LBVs in the Douro. A typical Ramos Pinto LBV is very elegant, yet has remarkable tensile strength and torrents of
plum, spice, and mocha flavors. The firm’s vintage Ports are getting more stellar by the vintage. Adriano Ramos
Pinto founded the house in 1880, when he was just twenty-one years old. Owned today by the French Champagne
house of Louis Roederer, the firm is still run on a daily basis by the Ramos Pinto family, and houses a museum
showcasing the art collection that the family has been building for over 130 years.




                                              W. & J. GRAHAM’S

                                                    Vintage Port
Graham’s is usually among the most sensuous of all vintage Ports. Typically, blueberry fruit soars in your mouth
and then explodes over and over again—like a brilliant rush of fireworks. In great vintages, the combination of
ultra-rich fruit, lots of chocolate and black tea flavors, plus supple, powerful tannin and the wine’s impeccable
balance is unbeatable. All of Graham’s vintage Ports are trodden by foot.
                                                    NIEPOORT

                                                     Vintage Port
Niepoort is a small, family-owned firm producing what are usually thrilling vintage Ports since 1842. Rich and
beautifully balanced, they are full of sweet, powerful fruit. The firm is known as well for its legendary colheita
Ports, reserve aged tawnies with absolutely mesmerizing syrupy brown sugar and vanilla flavors.
                                            QUINTA DO INFANTADO

                                             Single-Quinta Vintage Port
The vintage Ports from the tiny firm Quinta do Infantado (“Quinta of the Prince”) are chocolaty/spicy Ports with
briary anise and nutmeg flavors. The fruit is lush, nuanced, almost feminine in its elegance. For years the wine
made at Quinta do Infantado was sold to larger Port shippers such as Taylor Fladgate and Graham’s. That changed
in 1979, when the Roseira family, which has owned the estate for over one hundred years, led the region in fighting
for changes in the law to allow small producers to bottle and sell their own wine. Today, all of the firm’s production
is estate bottled. Every grape used at the quinta is handpicked and trodden by foot.




                                                      DOW’S

                                             SENHORA DA RIBEIRA
                                             Single-Quinta Vintage Port
Owned by the important Port shipper Dow, the small Senhora da Ribeira (Lady of the River) estate makes
extraordinary single-quinta Ports (in especially great years, the grapes go into Dow’s vintage Port). These are Ports
with a softness and smoothness that are so profound, one might imagine the touch of a baby’s cheek. The flavors,
however, are anything but subdued—a mad dance of bursting blueberries, violets, licorice, minerals, and the exotic
taste of the menthol-like resinous shrub that grows wild over the mountains (esteva). The old estate includes a
chapel right by the river, a place where travelers could be blessed (and pray) before they crossed the turbulent
waters.
                                              TAYLOR FLADGATE

                                                    Vintage Port
Highly sought after, Taylor’s vintage Ports are always among the most expensive. They’re also among the most
difficult to drink young. Unlike many vintage Ports, Taylor’s are initially secretive and cloaked by a dense curtain
of tannin. But with fifteen or so years of maturation, the top Taylor vintage Ports undergo a transformation that
defies prediction. Elegant and sophisticated, they exude finesse and richness. Taylor’s history is filled with firsts:
first Port shipper to purchase vineyards in the Douro Valley (in 1744), first to produce single-quinta vintage Port,
and the inventor of late-bottled vintage Port. The estate is also the only Port company to have remained 100 percent
family owned in its considerable—it was founded in 1692—history.




                                             QUINTA DO VESUVIO

                                                    Vintage Port
Considered by many to be the most magnificent traditional estate in the Douro Valley, the remote Quinta do
Vesuvio was founded in the mid-1500s on a brilliantly sunlit, south-facing bank, virtually cantilevered over the
river’s edge, with jaw-dropping views in all directions. For centuries, the hand-built terraced vineyards (which took
hundreds of men decades to hew out of the schist and rock) were considered jewels of the Douro. Today, the
vineyards (many of them old) and neo-Baroque manor house and chapel are owned by the Symington family. Only
vintage Port is produced on the estate, and the grapes are entirely trodden by foot. The wine is immaculate. When
young, it is explosive with blueberry, violet, cocoa powder, black fig, and mineral notes; when aged, it is
langorously supple and silky, yet still vivid and pure.
Old casks of verdelho aging in Blandy’s lodge. Between the long heating process (which for the very best Madeiras takes
 place in barrels), then the subsequent long barrel aging process, the finest Madeiras may age a total of forty years or
                                                         more.
MADEIRA

Fortified, oxidized, maderized, and aged for as long as two hundred years, Madeira has no
equal in the wine world. In fact, Madeira is unique and so hard to make, it’s remarkable
that the wine is still around today (a testament, surely, to its utter deliciousness). Here is
Madeira’s story.
   The wine Madeira comes from a small cluster of volcanic islands, the largest and most
important of which is also called Madeira—from ilha da madeira, “island of the woods.”
Although Madeira and its tiny sister islands are geographically part of Africa (about 310
miles/500 kilometers west of the Moroccan coast), they are nonetheless a province of
Portugal, some 620 miles (1,000 kilometers) to the northeast. In fact, the islands were
discovered in 1419 or 1420 (accounts differ), when the Portuguese explorer Prince Henry
the Navigator instructed the sea captain João Gonçalves Zarco to explore the coast of
Africa and establish a port of call that could be used as a provisions stop by ships bound
for the East Indies or the Americas.
   Ultimately, no wine would become more a part of the United States’ beginnings. Drunk
by the founding fathers during the signing of the Declaration of Independence, Madeira
was also what Francis Scott Key sipped as he composed “The Star-Spangled Banner.”
George Washington (who reportedly drank a pint every night with dinner), Thomas
Jefferson, and Benjamin Franklin all adored it, as did John Adams (who wrote to his wife,
Abigail, about the copious amounts they consumed during the Continental Congress). By
the end of the eighteenth century, nearly a fourth of all the Madeira produced was being
exported to the American colonies. Among the colonial well-to-do, Madeira parties—
forerunners of the American cocktail party—became commonplace.
   The unbridled American passion for Madeira was certainly a testament to its
compelling flavor. But Madeira’s popularity was equally based on something far more
mundane: taxes. As of 1665, British governing authorities in the colonies had banned the
importation of European goods, unless they were shipped on British ships that had sailed
from British ports (and paid British taxes). Merchandise shipped from Madeira was
exempted. Merchants in Madeira took full advantage of the loophole, establishing close
trading relationships with merchants in Baltimore, Boston, New York, Savannah,
Charleston, and Philadelphia. As American corn and cotton flowed out of the colonies,
Madeira wine flowed in.
                 THE LAND AND THE VINEYARDS

As is true in most of Portugal, growing grapes in Madeira is a herculean undertaking. The
island’s formidable terrain and maritime climate are significant obstacles to success, but
then almost everything about Madeira is rather miraculous, including the intricate and
painstaking manner by which the wine is made (more on this in a moment).
   The main island and its minuscule sisters are the tops of a vast mountain range under
the Atlantic Ocean (thought by some to be the lost continent of Atlantis). Volcanic in
origin, these summits are deeply fissured peaks of basalt (cooled lava), stacked
accordionlike one next to the other and separated by narrow ravines.
    The main island (where all of the vineyards are located) possesses just over 1,000 acres
(400 hectares) of grapevines. While bananas and sugarcane are grown extensively near the
coasts, grapes tend to be grown higher up in the mountains, nearer the tops of the peaks—
at altitudes from 600 to 1,300 feet (180 to 400 meters). Because the sheer cliff faces are
difficult to cultivate, terraces were built by hand centuries ago (much as they were in the
Douro). Necessarily, the vineyards themselves are often just tiny plots (locally referred to
as jardim—gardens). Even today, they are tended and harvested by hand (at considerable
expense), for machinery has proven virtually impossible to use in this landscape.
                                THE FLAVOR OF HISTORY
 If you want to taste something really old, Madeira is the answer. While finding a bottle of Bordeaux from,
 say, the 1960s can be daunting (not to mention fiscally dangerous), Madeiras that are a century old or
 more can easily be found in specialty wine shops. Indeed, vintage Madeiras that go back to the founding
 of the United States, in 1776, are known to exist. (For my part, I have tasted Blandy’s Madeiras back to
 the awesome, luscious 1811, which redefined my notion of exquisite.) What makes these centurions
 especially outstanding is, of course, their spellbinding complexity and aliveness. Properly sealed, a bottle
 of Madeira will easily outlive its owner, and remain in excellent condition throughout its life. Importantly,
 because it’s already been oxidized and maderized, Madeira is nearly indestructable. During colonial
 times (pre-refrigeration), this fact made Madeira especially appealing in the American South, where
 bottles could survive over decades of hot summers without any ill effects.

    Although the islands are on the same parallel as Los Angeles and Jerusalem, they get a
lot of rain—more, in fact, than London. But luckily, most of it falls in winter—between
October and April, when the vines are mostly dormant. Nonetheless, mold and mildew are
threats, and some vineyards are planted up on high trellises so that they are lifted way
above the ground and dew. A potentially more serious danger is the leste, an intense heat
wave blowing off the Sahara desert, which can cover the vines in sand and dust and raise
the temperature to more than 100°F (38°C) for weeks at a time.
                         HOW MADEIRA IS MADE

Like Port, Madeira is a fortified wine (17 to 20 percent alcohol by volume) that started out
unfortified. During the Age of Exploration (from the late fifteenth century into the
sixteenth) unfortified Madeira was part of the provisions picked up by merchant ships
traveling to Africa, the East Indies, and the New World. Baked in a sweltering hold, the
unfortified wine spoiled quickly. Soon, small amounts of distilled alcohol (made from
sugarcane) were being added to stabilize the wine. Later, by the late seventeenth century,
brandy (rather than simple distilled alcohol) was added, which not only helped preserve
the wine, but added a new dimension to its flavor.
   Madeira fortified with brandy turned out to be a remarkable product. Aged over years
on a rolling ship in the equatorial heat, this Madeira became a deliciously rich, velvety
wine. In time, the most prized Madeiras of all were the so-called vinhos da roda, Madeiras
that had taken a round-trip tropical cruise from Portugal to India and back again. As
sensational as they were, they were also exorbitantly expensive to produce. Eventually,
Madeira’s winemakers thought of ways to replicate the effects of a trip halfway around the
globe—without actually having to leave home.
   To make Madeira, a winemaker starts out as he would with any wine. Grapes are
harvested, crushed, pressed, and fermented in barrels or tanks.
    In the case of Madeira, the grapes include the white grapes—sercial, verdelho,
terrantez, bual (also known as boal and malvasia fina), and malmsey (technically the same
as malvasia branca de São Jorge)—plus the red grape tinta negra mole (also known as
negramoll). Historians believe that most of these grapes were brought to the island in the
fifteenth century from northern Portugal. As we’ll see, all but tinta negra mole are used
independently to create a separate style of Madeira. (See The Grapes and Styles of
Madeira, page 534.)
   As with Port, brandy is added to the fermenting grapes at a very specific point. The
brandy kills the yeasts, halts the fermentation, and leaves a fortified wine that has some of
the sweetness of the original grapes. How much sweetness depends on when the brandy is
added. If the brandy is added early in the fermentation, a lot of sweetness will be left. If
the brandy is added at the tail end of fermentation, the Madeira will be almost dry.
   But Madeira’s toffee-caramel-butterscotch-cocoa-curry-like character comes not only
as a result of the grapes used and the sweetness left in the wine. Next, the Madeira-to-be
will be maderized and oxidized.
   During maderization, the Madeira is heated—either slowly and naturally in hot attics
(simulating months and sometimes years of heat in the hold of a ship sailing through the
tropics), or by a process known as estufagem (esh-too-FAH-jaym) in specially designed
tanks that can be heated. Indeed, the term for heating wine—maderization—originates
from the word Madeira itself.
    Several methods can be employed to maderize the wine, depending on the quality of
the Madeira being made. For basic, inexpensive Madeira, the fortified base wine is placed
in large vats fitted with serpentine stainless-steel heating coils. The wine is then slowly
heated to a maximum temperature of 131°F (55°C) for three to six months—a method of
estufagem called cuba de calor. Importantly, the wine is heated very, very slowly, for
heated too quickly, the wine takes on a slightly burnt flavor and ages prematurely.
   Another method—armazém de calor—involves storing large casks of the fortified wine
in specially designed rooms that can be heated like a sauna. This slightly more gentle
process can last for six months to a year.

                                     STENCILED BOTTLES
    Just as they were hundreds of years ago, bottles of vintage Madeira continue to be stenciled, rather than
    labeled with a paper label. The process, done by hand by older women in the producers’ lodges, dates
    from a time when the island was so poor and isolated that shipments of paper from the mainland could
    not be depended upon.

   However, for the very finest Madeiras (a minuscule 3 percent of all Madeiras made) the
heating is carried out naturally, more or less as it was done centuries ago. By this method
(called canteiro), casks of the best wines are placed in rooms in the producers’ lodges
(warehouses), which, sitting under the hot Madeiran sun, eventually build up tremendous
heat. There the casks remain undisturbed, usually for about twenty years, although
sometimes as long as one hundred years or more.
   Importantly, the casks are not filled to the brim, nor are they topped up. The
combination of time, heat, and oxygen has a superb mellowing effect on the wine, creating
an inimitable texture and flavor.
   But the Madeira isn’t quite done yet. After the heating process is complete, the wine is
carefully and slowly cooled and allowed to rest (sometimes for a year or more, to recover
from the sustained heat). When the wine is deemed well rested, it is aged even further.
   For the finest Madeiras, this aging process is also lengthy and involved. The wines are
put into casks made from various woods—usually American oak, but sometimes chestnut,
Brazilian satinwood, or even mahogany. Again, the casks are not filled to the top; instead,
a head space is deliberately left so that the wine continues to slowly oxidize, mellowing
the flavors even more.
   Unbelievable as it may be, a fine Madeira is usually aged twenty years or more after
the twenty-year heating process but before blending and bottling (and this doesn’t count
the time that it might be aged further in bottle in someone’s cellar). Thus, many great
Madeiras are at least forty years in the making!
           THE GRAPES AND STYLES OF MADEIRA

The very best Madeiras—and the ones you should taste—are made from one of five white
grapes designated as “noble” by the Madeira Wine Institute. These are sercial, verdelho,
terrantez, bual, and malmsey. Conveniently, the names of these grapes are also used to
designate the styles of Madeira (so I have not included a separate box on the grapes of this
region). I’ll start with the driest style (sercial) and move to the sweetest (malmsey).
   But before I get to the big five styles, know that there are also inexpensive, basic
Madeiras that have little of the refinement or complexity of sercial, verdelho, terrantez,
bual (boal), or malmsey. Most of these basic-quality Madeiras are made from the red
grape tinta negra mole (the name means “black soft”), and come designated as either dry,
medium dry, medium sweet, or sweet. Among these basic Madeiras, the light style known
as Rainwater (said to be the accidental result of casks left out in the rain) is fairly popular.
But all of these basic Madeiras are, in my opinion, better for cooking than drinking, and in
fact, because the wine is already maderized and oxidized, you can leave a bottle handy
right beside the stove.
SERCIAL:  The driest style (see The Sweetness Level of Each Madeira Style, page 535).
Sercial grapes are grown in the coolest vineyards. The difficulties they encounter in
ripening make for tart base wines. These in turn lead to tangy, elegant Madeiras with a
bracing, almost salty grip and a dry, nutty flavor that I always imagine to be like caramel
minus any sweetness.
VERDELHO:    The medium-dry style. Verdelho grapes, grown in slightly warmer vineyards,
ripen more easily, making for Madeiras that are exquisitely balanced and somewhat more
full-bodied than sercials.
TERRANTEZ:  A rare style based on a rare grape that is difficult to grow. It typically falls
between verdelho and bual in sweetness and body.
BUAL:  Another rare style; this one, medium-rich. Bual grapes (or boal, as it is sometimes
spelled) are grown in warm vineyards, producing concentrated Madeiras with sweet
richness. Bual was a great favorite in English officers’ clubs in India because it was a
lighter wine than either malmsey or Port. Bual/boal is the same as the grape variety
malvasia fina.
MALMSEY:    The richest, sweetest style. Also known as malvasia (once again, in this case,
the malvasia is malvasia branca de São Jorge), these grapes are grown in the warmest
locations, usually on the south side of the island, producing superripe grapes and
ultimately, Madeiras of astonishing richness.
              THE QUALITY LEVELS OF MADEIRA

In addition to styles of Madeira, there are also quality levels. In ascending order, they are
three-year-old, five-year-old, ten-year-old, fifteen-year-old, solera, colheita, and vintage
Madeiras, known as frasqueira.
THREE-YEAR-OLD MADEIRA:    These are Madeiras made from tinta negra mole grapes that
undergo a quick heating process and are then aged at least three years, usually in tanks, not
casks. These are sometimes labeled “finest,” and are totally fine… for cooking.

              THE SWEETNESS LEVEL OF EACH MADEIRA
                             STYLE
         Here are the sweetness levels of the top Madeiras. Keep in mind that the generally high
         level of acidity in fine Madeira means that even at, say, 6 percent residual sugar, a
         Madeira can taste quite dry.
         SERCIAL: 0 to 6 percent residual sugar VERDELHO: 6 to 7.5 percent residual sugar
         TERRANTEZ: 7 to 8 percent residual sugar
         BUAL: 7.5 to 10 percent residual sugar MALMSEY: 10 percent or more residual sugar

FIVE-YEAR-OLD RESERVE MADEIRA:        This is the minimum quality level for a Madeira
labeled with one of the noble varieties, sercial, verdelho, terrantez, bual, or malmsey. A
five-year-old reserve is a blended Madeira in which the youngest component in the blend
is aged at least five years in casks.
TEN-YEAR-OLD SPECIAL RESERVE MADEIRA:      Higher still in quality are Madeiras, often made
from the noble grapes, where the youngest component in the blend is aged at least ten
years in casks. These special reserve Madeiras must go through the heating process
naturally in casks, not tanks.
FIFTEEN-YEAR-OLD EXTRA RESERVE MADEIRA:        Even better yet. The youngest component
must be aged at least fifteen years. These wines are also maderized in casks (not in tanks)
and are usually made from noble grapes.
SOLERA MADEIRA:   While they can still be found on the market, these wines are very rare,
and can no longer be produced, according to European Union law. Like Sherry, solera
Madeiras are made by an intricate process of fractional blending (see How the Solera
Works, page 458).
COLHEITA MADEIRA:     Sometimes called “harvest” Madeiras, colheitas are a relatively new
type of Madeira. They are made from grapes grown in a single year, then bottled after
spending at least five years aging. The first colheita Madeira was a Blandy’s 1994
Malmsey released in 2000. These are, in effect, early-bottled frasqueira wines. They must
be made from the five noble varieties.
FRASQUEIRA OR VINTAGE MADEIRA:      This is the ultimate quality level, and the wines can be
ravishing in their complexity. Vintage Madeiras are wines of a single year. Remarkably,
vintage Madeira must be aged at least twenty years in cask after the heating period, and
then an additional two years in the bottle. Vintage Madeira must be made from one of the
five noble grapes.
                                MADEIRA PRODUCERS
Although there were more than two dozen producers exporting Madeira at the time of the American
Revolution, by the second decade of the twenty-first century, fewer than ten remained. Today, the largest
distinguished firm is the Madeira Wine Company, which owns most of the top brands, including Blandy’s,
Cossart Gordon, Leacock’s, and Miles. The Madeira Wine Company is partly owned by the Symington
family, which also owns many top Port firms, including Warre’s, Dow’s, Graham’s, Quinta do Vesuvio,
and Smith Woodhouse. In addition, the Rare Wine Company, based in Sonoma, California, in association
with the Madeira firm Vinhos Barbeito, produces a historic series of Madeiras based on the top fine
Madeiras once sold in Boston, New York, Savannah, and New Orleans.
                            SERVING MADEIRA

Madeira is best served in a good-size white wine glass, so that there’s enough room to
swirl the wine. Sercials and verdelhos—the drier styles—are usually served cool; the
sweeter styles—buals and malmseys—are served at coolish room temperature.
   All styles of Madeira have a gripping backbone of natural acidity, making them
refreshing to drink on their own but also exquisite counterpoints to food. Sercial and
verdelho are dramatic aperitifs and delicious with first-course salads or soups. Bual and
luscious malmsey can be desserts in themselves, but their racy acidity also means they are
among the world’s best juxtapositions to the richness of desserts made with cream or
chocolate. One of my most favorite combinations in the world is chocolate chip cookies
with Malmsey Madeira.
   Finally, an opened bottle of Madeira lasts nearly forever. After everything it’s been
through—fortification, extreme heat, long aging in the presence of oxygen—Madeira is
pretty indestructible.
The Ponte de Lima, a bridge in the Minho region of northern Portugal, leads to the church of San António. During the
                           Middle Ages, the Minho was governed by Benedictine monks.
PORTUGUESE TABLE WINES

          THE MINHO | THE DOURO | DÃO | BAIRRADA | ALENTEJO
Historically, there have been two Portugals—the famous Portugal that made Port and the
obscure Portugal that made dry table wines. The two worlds rarely overlapped, and the
vast majority of producers made either one style of wine or the other, not both. Port was
renowned but, with one or two exceptions, the country’s table wines were less than
inspired. Most were the cheap products of cooperatives.
   But in the years following Portugal’s entry into the European Economic Community in
1986, the picture slowly began to change. By the last decade of the twentieth century,
some of the most underrated dry red and white table wines in Europe were coming from
Portugal. Bold, distinctive reds and fresh, flavorful whites, they were delicious and often
good values. And they still are. But for the first time, Portugal’s top wine firms are now
also taking higher aim and making phenomenal dry wines—reds in particular—priced like
top cabernet sauvignons from Napa Valley or Bordeaux.
                THE GRAPES OF PORTUGAL–TABLE WINES
 Portugal has more than 250 grape varieties, and most table wines are blends of several of them. Below
 are the major grapes, most of them native to the Iberian Peninsula.

                                             WHITES
 ALVARINHO: Portuguese grape, well known for being one of the main grapes used to make many vinho
 verdes, although more than twenty other white grapes are also permitted. It is known as albariño in
 Galicia, Spain, next door.
 ARINTO: Used throughout Portugal in dozens of blended wines. Commonly used in vinho verde (where
 it is known as pederña) for its good balance of freshness and fruitiness.
 AVESSO: A full-bodied white used in blends in the Minho region to produce white table wines and vinho
 verdes.
 ENCRUZADO: A leading grape in the simple white wines of the Dão.
 GOUVEIO AND VIOSINHO: Commonly blended together—sometimes along with malvasia fina—to
 make white table wines in the Douro. Also used for white Port.
 LOUREIRO AND TRAJADURA: Along with pederña (arinto) frequently used in making vinho verde,
 usually blended with each other.
 MALVASIA FINA: Portuguese grape native to either the Douro or the Dão and today a leading grape in
 the white wines of the Dão.

                                               REDS
 ALFROCHEIRO PRETO, BASTARDO, AND JAÉN: Important grapes in the Dão, where they contribute
 spice and acidity.
 ARAGONEZ: One of the Portuguese names for the Spanish grape tempranillo. A leading grape used to
 make wines in the Alentejo region.
 AZAL TINTO (AKA AMARAL) AND VINHÃO: Two of the leading grapes commonly blended together to
 make the sharp but fresh-tasting red vinho verde.
 BAGA: The word means “berry” in Portuguese. Grown in almost all regions, but especially important in
 Bairrada. Tannic and acidic.
 PERIQUITA: The word means “parakeet” in Portuguese. One of the leading grapes used to make wines
 in the Alentejo, and grown in other regions as well.
 TINTA BARROCA, TOURIGA FRANCA, TINTA RORIZ, TINTO CÃO, AND TOURIGA TINTA RORIZ,
 TINTO CÃO, AND TOURIGA NACIONAL: Well-established Portuguese grapes, often blended together
 to make table wines in the Douro and sometimes the Dão. Most are also used in the making of Port.
 TRINCADEIRA PRETA: One of the leading grapes used to make wines in the Alentejo. Also known as
 tinta amarela.

   Portuguese table wines are almost always blends of many grape varieties rarely found
elsewhere. Most of these are thought to be Phoenician in origin, or varieties that are
thought to have originated on the Iberian Peninsula. Indeed, some Portuguese table wines
are still based on centuries-old field blends, with potentially a dozen or more varieties
interplanted in the vineyard. For red wines (a majority of the table wines made are red),
the most common varieties are also the major varieties used for Port (see page 514), but
other varieties also show up, including jaén, alfrocheiro preto, periquita, and baga, among
others.
   As is true almost everywhere in Europe, Portuguese wines are named not by grape
variety, but by region. Here are the top five wine regions, going from north to south.
Historically, with the exception of the Minho, all of the regions were better known for red
wines than white, although Portuguese table whites are now making great strides in
quality and are thus attracting a following.




Quinta de Covela in the Minho. The 16th-century estate, which was recently restored, specializes in unique blends that
                                    combine Portuguese and French varieties.
                                         THE MINHO

In the far northwest, just below the Spanish border, the fertile, rolling green hills are
crammed with orchards and farm crops (corn, potatoes, and beans). This is the Minho, one
of the most agriculturally productive regions of the country, and the region where many
bold, fresh-tasting white table wines are made. Among these is one of Portugal’s most
popular white wines—vinho verde.
   Vinho verde (literally, “green wine”) used to be a light, low-alcohol, inexpensive white
with a touch of spritz meant for washing down humble fish dishes. Today, however, more
serious vinho verdes are being made—wines with greater flavor intensity and no fizz. The
word verde (green), by the way, refers not to the wine’s color but to the fact that
historically vinho verde was a young wine meant to be drunk soon after it was made. In
days past, so immediate was the consumption of vinho verde that many producers didn’t
even bother to put a vintage date on the bottle.
    Vinho verde can be made from any of twenty-five white grapes, or a combination of
them. The best wines, however, come from alvarinho, trajadura, and loureiro (known as
albariño, treixadura, and loureira in Rías Baixas, the Spanish wine region next door), as
well as with the grape arinto, one of Portugal’s fascinatingly fresh, citrusy whites. Indeed,
in the past few years, the top vinho verdes have improved so much in quality that they
seem very much like their Rías Baixas sisters—the vinho verde from Quinta das Arcas, for
example. One of the most serious producers to watch here is Anselmo Mendes.

        YO, NEW YORKAS… WHO’S THE QUEEN IN QUEENS?
    The borough of Queens, part of New York City, was named after the Princess of Portugal, Catherine of
    Braganza, who became Queen of England in 1662. It was during the reign of her husband, King Charles
    II, that the colony of New Amsterdam became New York, and Queens was named to honor Catherine.

   A large percentage of vinho verde is not white but red. Red “green” wine is usually not
exported, but when you’re in Portugal, don’t pass up a chance to try it. A shocking
magenta in color, red vinho verde can be fascinating, but it can also be as bitingly acidic
as red wine gets. This is considered a plus, given the region’s rustic bean, pork, and oily
codfish dishes.
   All of this said, know that vinho verde is only one of the DOs (denominations) in the
Minho. For as good as the best vinho verdes are, some of the most avant-garde, intriguing
whites are simply labeled Minho and are based on varieties not used for vinho verde. A
good example is Quinta de Covela’s terrific dry white that is a blend of avesso,
chardonnay, viognier, and gewürztraminer.
                                         THE DOURO

While the Douro is famous for Port (see page 511), it’s also the up-and-coming region for
Portugal’s top dry red table wines—and there are many: Quinta do Vesuvio’s Pombal do
Vesuvio, Chryseia, Wine & Soul Pintas, Quinta do Malhô, Grande Escolha Piheiros,
Quinta da Gricha, Quinta do Vallado, and Conceito among them. These are structured,
powerful wines with dark, peaty flavors and a juicy black fig character (imagine Port if it
wasn’t fortified or sweet). They are aged in new French oak barrels and often possess a
unique, resinous chaparral aroma not unlike the smell of esteva, a rock rose that grows
along the terrace walls in the vineyards.
   The vineyards for Douro table wines are, like the vineyards for Port, on rocky hillsides
of schist. Of the nearly forty grapes allowed, some of the principal red grapes are the same
as those used for Port: touriga franca, touriga nacional, tinta roriz, tinta barroca, tinto cão,
sousão, and the spicy grape tinta da barca.

              THE WAY WE WERE: LANCERS AND MATEUS
         For any American in the baby boomer generation who began drinking wine in college,
         the two big date-night wines were Lancers and Mateus. Both wines are slightly
         sparkling, slightly sweet Portuguese rosés, and both played a phenomenally important
         role in the culture of wine in the U.S. in the 1950s, ’60s, and ’70s (both wines are still
         available today).
            Lancers, produced by the historic Portuguese firm J. M. da Fonseca, was the 1944
         brainchild of an American wine merchant named Henry Behar, who was looking for a
         rosé that would suit post-World War II American tastes. Behar named the wine after Las
         Lanzas (The Lancers), his favorite painting by the Spanish master Velázquez. From the
         beginning, it was bottled in the dark red crockery bottle that became its signature.
            Mateus had been created two years earlier, in 1942, by Fernando van Zeller
         Guedes, founder of the Portuguese firm Sogrape. A blend of several grapes, including
         baga, tinta barroca, and touriga franca, Mateus came in squat, flaskshaped bottles,
         modeled on the water canteens soldiers carried during World War I. More than a billion
         bottles have been sold since the brand began. Finally, while it is said that Queen
         Elizabeth II regularly ordered Mateus as an accompaniment to her dinners at the Savoy
         Hotel, Mateus’s most legendary customer may well have been Jimi Hendrix, who didn’t
         bother with a glass, but drank it straight from the flask instead.
Harvesting touriga nacional grapes in the Dão. Portugal’s red table wines are loaded with personality.
                                          DÃO

Another one of Portugal’s most promising regions for red table wines, the Dão began to
produce markedly better wines in the late 1980s, after the government rescinded the law
requiring that all grapes grown in the region be sold to cooperatives. The region lies about
30 miles (48 kilometers) south of the Douro River. It is enclosed on three sides by
mountains, which shelter the region from the chill and moisture of the Atlantic and give it
a Mediterranean climate.
   Nearly fifty grapes are authorized for use in the region. The best of them is the red
touriga nacional, one of the major Port grapes. Other good-quality red grapes include
alfrocheiro preto, jaén, and bastardo.
                                              SETÚBAL
 According to legend, Setúbal was settled by one of Noah’s sons, Tubal, hence the region’s name. The
 small peninsula, about 20 miles (32 kilometers) south of Lisbon, is known for only one wine, the famous
 dessert wine also known as Setúbal. A sweet fortified wine, like Port, Setúbal is made principally from
 two types of muscat grapes: moscatel de Setúbal (muscat of Alexandria) and moscatel roxo (purple
 muscat). Up to 30 percent of five other indigenous grapes may be blended in.
    The best Setúbals are almost hauntingly aromatic, thanks to the extraordinarily long time the grape
 skins are left macerating in the wine—up to six months. The wine’s flavor is outrageously irresistible, a
 rich, exotic mingling of mandarin oranges, caramel, molasses, and wild herbs. And the color can be
 mesmerizing, from vivid orange-red to rich chestnut. Setúbal is usually drunk with cakes made with nuts,
 such as walnut cake.
   Setúbal may be vintage dated or may be a blend of wines of different ages. A Setúbal labeled twenty
 years old, for example, will be a blend of several wines, the youngest of which is twenty years old. Only a
 handful of companies make Setúbal, including the well-respected firm J. M. da Fonseca.

  Among the leading Dão wines are Alvaro Castro Quinta da Pellada, Quinta dos
Roques, and Quinta das Marias.
                                    BAIRRADA

Bairrada derives its name from barro, the Portuguese word for clay, which constitutes a
large percentage of the soil in the region. Bairrada is just west of the Dão, in central
Portugal, and is not far from the Atlantic Ocean. The leading grape is the juicy, acidic
baga, which by law must make up 50 percent of the blend of any red wine made there.
Some fifteen other grapes are grown.
   About 60 percent of Portugal’s sparkling wines are made here, including rustic, grapey,
red sparkling wines that are often paired with the region’s specialty, roast suckling pig.
Among the top Bairrada wines are those made by Luís Pato, Caves São João, and
Campolargo.
                                     ALENTEJO

The biggest wine region in Portugal, the Alentejo covers virtually all of the southeastern
part of the country. The hot, dry, rolling plains produce, in addition to wine, olive oil, and
cereal grains, more than half of the world’s supply of cork.
   The soil here is mostly volcanic in origin and includes granite, quartz, schist, and chalk.
As in most of Portugal’s other top regions, the finest wines are red (although, increasingly,
a number of surprisingly refreshing whites are made). Among the popular red grapes are
periquita, aragonez, and trincadeira preta. The Alentejo has historically been a poor
region. Since ancient Roman times, the lack of forests here meant that wines were made in
huge earthenware amphorae. A handful of producers continue to make wine this way
today.
   The top Alentejo red wines have a plummy/spicy/peppery character and come from
near the Spanish border. Among the best are Herdade do Esporão, Herdade do Sobroso,
and Herdade do Peso.
                The Portuguese Table Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                              QUINTA DAS ARCAS
                                             VINHO VERDE | MINHO
                                          Loureiro, trajadura, and arinto
Fresh, limey, lively, and almost gingery in the way it refreshes the palate, Quinta das Arcas is among a group of
estates moving away from the vinho verdes of the past and making more dramatically flavorful wines not unlike
those of their next-door neighbor, the albariños of Rías Baixas, in Spain. The estate, founded in 1985, is one of four
small estates in Minho and Alentejo owned by the Monteiro family. The family also produces handmade cheeses on
the property.
                                               QUINTA DE COVELA

                                            COVELA BRANCO | MINHO
                                  Avesso, chardonnay, viognier, and gewürztraminer
This very unusual regional blend of indigenous, modern, and aromatic grapes is phenomenally successful and has a
unique flavor that’s not quite like any single one of the grapes used to make it. Concentrated and lush (but not
heavy), the wine has floral, tropical, and citrus notes that are pure and delicious. The Covela estate is in the area of
the Minho where vinho verde is made, but the winery specializes in atypical white and red blends, some of which
incorporate French grapes such as chardonnay, viognier, and cabernet sauvignon. The estate has passed through
many hands over the years and most recently lay fallow, until it was purchased in the 2010s by a Brazilian
businessman and British journalist who have restored it to its former glory. Parts of the main building date to the
1500s, when the stone Renaissance manor, Casa de Covela, ruled over the hillside.




                                            HERDADE DO ESPORÃO

                                               RESERVA | ALENTEJO
                           Antão vaz, arinto, roupeiro, and sémillon in varying proportions
The very warm-climate Alentejo region of southern Portugal does not seem like a place where crisp, racy whites
could be made. But they are. Over thousands of years, grape varieties on the Iberian Peninsula have adapted to the
severe climate, and the wines that result can often mimic wines from regions much farther north. This white reserva
from Herdade do Esporão is a great example. Bone-dry, bracing, and full of personality, it has a spicy, citrusy
tangerine and piquant green herb character that’s cool and refreshing. Herdade do Esporão is one of the most
stunning estates of southern Portugal and includes an important archaeological site and museum, as well as olive
groves that yield some of Portugal’s most renowned and sought-after olive oils.
                                                     REDS




                                            PRATS & SYMINGTON
                                              CHRYSEIA | DOURO
                  Tinta franca, touriga nacional, tinta roriz, tinto cão in varying proportions
A 1998 joint venture by Portugal’s Symington family and Bordeaux’s Bruno Prats (former owner of Cos
d’Estournel), Chryseia is widely regarded as a marriage of Portuguese tradition with modern Bordeaux
winemaking. The wine is broodingly dark, sophisticated, structured, and evocative of bitter chocolate, cocoa, earth,
and gamey meats. Yet for all its intensity, Chryseia has an elegance that comes across in its minerality and floral
notes. The Symingtons and Prats are firm believers that the best grapes for Portuguese table wines are the intense,
highly adapted great grapes that make Port. (Indeed, this table wine comes from blocks that are also used for
vintage Port.) The name Chryseia means “golden” in Greek.
                                            QUINTA DO VESUVIO

                                       POMBAL DO VESUVIO | DOURO
                              Touriga franca, plus touriga nacional and tinta amarela
Despite their richness, Portuguese table wines have a wonderful freshness to them. Their freshness and precision
remind me of cranberries, which are more fresh than, say, cherries. Quinta do Vesuvio’s Pombal do Vesuvio (the
name refers to the dovecote—pombal—in the middle of these vineyards) is a vivid wine with terrific, lightly bitter
espresso flavors, plus notes of spice and peat, but also vanilla and chocolate. Quinta do Vesuvio, one of the most
impressive estates of the Douro Valley, is famous for its Port. This is the second wine of the estate.
                                              QUINTA DO VALLADO

                                                 RESERVA | DOURO
                                  A field blend of more than twenty grape varieties
Duoro red table wines have a flavor evocative of the landscape—a wild chaparral, raspy scrub brush character—
which tastes fantastic given the soft, dense core of black fig and tobacco flavors in these wines. Quinta do Vallado,
which is also the home of the Port shipper Ferreira, is a perfect example of this, and a wine that de facto tastes more
of its place than of a certain variety or varieties. Indeed, the wine is a field blend of old vines with more than twenty
indigenous varieties interplanted, including tinta roriz, tinta amarela, and touriga franca. (Many such field blends of
old vines remain in Portugal, and the often extraordinary wines that come from them are usually expensive.)
Established in 1716, Quinta do Vallado is one of the oldest and most famous quintas in the Douro Valley, and today
includes a stunning small hotel. It once belonged to Dona Antónia Adelaide Ferreira, a legendary businesswoman
in the Port trade (historically completely dominated by men), and still belongs to her descendants.
                                                                     GERMANY

                             MOSEL | RHEINGAU | PFALZ
                AHR | BADEN | FRANKEN | MITTELRHEIN | NAHE | RHEINHESSEN
GERMANY RANKS NINTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE GERMANS
DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 10 GALLONS (38 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Until the twentieth century there were only two great wine-producing countries: France
and Germany. While outstanding wines could occasionally be found elsewhere, no other
country came close to these two for the supremacy of their wines. Indeed, in nineteenth-
century London wine-auction and retail catalogs, German rieslings sold for more than
First Growth Bordeaux and Grand Cru Burgundy.
    Germany’s vineyards lie at the northernmost extreme of where grapes can ripen
dependably. At latitudes of 49 to 51 degrees, these vineyards are as far north as Mongolia
and Newfoundland. Yet it is precisely this northern climate (along with many other factors
I’ll discuss) that gives German wines—especially rieslings—their shimmering beauty. The
best German wines are, in many ways, what all wine aspires to be: an expression of fruit
so vivid and pure that it is lifted up out of the ponderous, corporeal world of humanity and
becomes a spiritual experience.
   Of course, generic wines of no particular distinction are made in Germany, just as they
are everywhere else. Cheap and sweetish, these wines (sadly) constitute many wine
drinkers’ entire experience with German wines, and give rise to the gross misconception
that German wine is categorically sweet. In fact, the top wines are just the opposite—they
are dry. I’ll address the confusion over dryness and sweetness momentarily, but for now,
know that this chapter leaves generic wines aside and focuses on Germany’s majestic
wines—wines that should not be missed by anyone who loves flavor. For an explanation
of German wine law, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 926.

      The best German wines are, in many ways, what all wine aspires to be: an
      expression of fruit so vivid and pure that it is lifted up out of the ponderous,
      corporeal world of humanity and becomes a spiritual experience.
        THE TERRORS (AND THRILL) OF TERROIR

At northern extremes every nuance of terroir is magnified. Something as simple as being
in the shadow of a ridge can ruin all hopes for ripeness, and hence all hopes of producing a
wine of depth and intensity. As a result, Germany’s vineyards—252,000 acres(102,000
hectares) in 2012—are the most precisely sited of any in the world. The best are always
planted on south-, west-, or east-facing slopes to catch the light and warmth of every
available sunbeam. (Northfacing slopes are easy to identify; they’re always vineless.)
Most of the vineyards are planted in the river valleys of the Rhine and Mosel or their
tributaries, since bodies of water act to moderate the severe climate.
    Soil, too, must do its share. All of Germany’s good vineyards are planted in places with
heat-retaining soil and rocks, such as slate and basalt. When each critical puzzle piece is
fit together to form the whole picture, the wines will have just crested into ripeness, yet
still be brimming—if not glistening—with acidity.

      The German word for vineyard is weinberg, literally, “wine hill.” Many of the
      country’s best vineyards are in fact on slopes, some of them as steep as 70
      percent.


                          THE QUICK SIP ON GERMANY
         GERMANY is considered one of the world’s top producers of elegant white wines. The
         country’s best rieslings, for example, have ravishing purity and concentration.
         GERMAN VINEYARDS are at the northernmost extreme of where grapes can
         dependably ripen.
         THE MAJORITY OF FINE German wines are dry or just a touch off-dry. The exceptions
         are the expensive late-harvest dessert wines beerenauslesen (BAs),
         trockenbeerenauslesen trockenbeerenauslesen (TBAs), and eisweins, all of which are
         crafted to be sweet.

   A word on ripeness. More than any other country in the world, Germany has benefited
from climate change. For example, for most German wine regions in the 1960s and 1970s,
only two or three vintages in a decade yielded ripe grapes and were considered a success.
Today, virtually every vintage results in ripe grapes and is considered successful. To be
sure, ripeness in Germany usually proceeds incrementally (there are few heat waves), but
this is an advantage because grapes that ripen slowly have a better chance of developing
complex flavors than grapes that get ripe fast. In short, Germany’s changed climate has
had a profound impact on the wines that are now made, and how those wines are
categorized. I’ll get to that later in this chapter.
   If anything has been a German constant, however, it’s acidity, and the levels are indeed
high. For example, most Champagnes clock in at 5 or 6 grams of acidity per liter and are
considered very fresh and crisp. German wines usually possess 6 to 8 grams per liter.
           FROM ROME TO BURGUNDY: GERMANY’S ROOTS
 Curved wine pruning knives dating back to A.D. 100 have been found near the ruins of Roman garrisons
 along the Rhine River, suggesting that early wine-making in Germany was heavily influenced by Italy. But
 the first documentation of winegrowing in Germany comes from the Bordeaux writer Ausonius, whose
 poem “Mosella,” written around A.D. 370, describes the meandering Rhine River and the vineyards
 clinging to the steep hills along it. By the time of the Middle Ages, monks were painstakingly planting and
 cultivating what are today considered the most famous vineyards. This ecclesiastical period was
 Germany’s viticultural heyday, and the country is thought to have had four times as many acres of
 vineyard land then than exist there today. Around the 1500s, Germany’s golden period waned due to a
 changing (colder) climate, greater wine imports, and perhaps the most persuasive reason of all: Better
 beer was being brewed. The final major change came in 1803, when Napoléon conquered the Rhine
 region and church ownership of the vineyards ended. As happened in Burgundy, vast sweeps of vineyard
 land were divided up, often into tiny parcels, and auctioned off to thousands of individuals. Indeed, today,
 the structure of the German wine industry resembles that of Burgundy more than any other place.

   Because of their naturally high acidity, the top German wines often appear to be
weightless on the palate. Indeed, instead of weight, most wines have tension, a dynamic
energy coursing between the wine’s acidity and fruit. Indeed, acidity is so important that
German winemakers think of it qualitatively, not just quantitatively. When acidity is at its
best, for example, it’s often described as “round acidity” or “fine acidity”—a kind of
harmonious crispness that comes across as tiny pinpoints of energy. But acidity can also
be sour, garish, or hard—the sensory equivalent of shattering glass. My friend the vintner
Johannes Selbach, of Selbach-Oster in the Mosel region, calls this loud acidity
“Hollywood acidity.”
   Because of the wines’ naturally high levels of acidity, it’s impossible to think about (or
evaluate) a German wine in the same way you would, say, a California wine. Big and
powerful may be desirable adjectives when applied to wines from California, but German
wine-makers’ mindsets are different. What they hope to achieve are precision, finesse, and
a sense of transparency, meaning that the wine becomes a sheer reflection of the potential
flavors bound up in a vineyard.
   Transparency and tension are discernible in fine German wine only because the best
wine-makers are adamant purists. They do nothing that would alter or mold the inherent
flavor of the grapes. They do not use commercial yeasts, adjust the acidity in the grapes,
chaptalize, or ferment or age the wine in new oak. And many do not even fine the wines to
clarify them.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Let’s have a look at grapes first. Germany is mainly a producer of white wines, although
red wines account for a surprising 40 percent of production and rosés (called weissherbst)
are also made.
                             THE GRAPES OF GERMANY
                                              WHITES
GEWÜRZTRAMINER: A very good quality grape, although not widely planted. It can make excellent
wines, especially in the Pfalz.
GRAUBURGUNDER: The same as pinot gris. Makes fairly big, popular wines with good flavor,
especially in Germany’s more southern districts.
GUTEDEL: The same as chasselas in Switzerland. A minor grape made into simple wines. Mostly found
in Baden.
HUXELREBE: A relatively new cross of gutedel and courtillier musqué. A very minor grape sometimes
added to blends.
KERNER: A cross of riesling and the red grape trollinger. Although it can make delicious, simple wines,
plantings in Germany are now in decline.
MÜLLER-THURGAU: One of the most widely planted grapes. DNA typing has established it as a cross
between riesling and Madeleine royale, a table grape of unknown parentage. The vines produce larger
yields than riesling, and the quality of the wine comes nowhere close.
MUSKATELLER: Sometimes called gelber muskateller (yellow muscat), this grape is actually the
beautifully aromatic, fruity muscat blanc à petits grains. Germany’s dry muskatellers, though not made in
large quantities, rival the exquisite dry muscats of Alsace, France.
RIESLANER: A cross of riesling and silvaner, it can make good, zesty wines, especially in the Pfalz and
Franken regions.
RIESLING: Considered Germany’s greatest grape, it has remarkable finesse, elegance, and aging
potential. Grown on all the best sites.
SCHEUREBE: A cross made in 1916 of riesling and an unknown grape, specifically for use in the
Rheinhessen and Pfalz. Wines made from it have grapefruit overtones and racy acidity.
SILVANER: A major grape native to Austria, it is the same as sylvaner in the Alsace region of France. A
source of dependably good but rarely great wines. In production, it is the leading grape of Franken.
WEISSBURGUNDER: The same as pinot blanc. A minor grape, it makes neutral to good, likable wines.
The best are often from Baden, the Pfalz, and the Nahe.

                                                REDS
BLAUER PORTUGIESER: Among reds, this grape is second in importance after spätburgunder. Makes
light, acidic red wines.
DORNFELDER: Makes popular wines that are fruity and grapey. Germany’s Beaujolais.
SPÄTBURGUNDER: The same as pinot noir. Germany’s leading and best quality red grape in terms of
production, it makes light, spicy, expensive wines.
SYRAH: Only a tiny amount is currently produced, but the potential is high.
                 THE MOST IMPORTANT GERMAN WINES
                                           LEADING WINE

         RIESLING white (dry and sweet)
                                          WINES OF NOTE

         GRAUBURGUNDER white
         MÜLLER-THURGAU white
         RIESLANER white (dry and sweet)
         SCHEUREBE white (dry and sweet)
         SEKT white (sparkling)
         SILVANER white
         SPÄTBURGUNDER red
         WEISSBURGUNDER white

    Of the nearly sixty grapes grown, riesling is the most prestigious. Nearly 60 percent of
all the riesling in the world is grown in Germany, and virtually all of Germany’s best
wines are made from it. (This comes as no surprise, since the grape is thought to have
originated in Germany’s Rheingau region.) For the finest wines, riesling is never blended
with another grape. Like the top pinot noirs in Burgundy, fine rieslings need to stand
alone, for the grape’s flavors are only diffused by blending.
    After riesling, Germany’s next most important white grape is Müller-Thurgau, which
usually makes soft, decent, but rarely memorable wines. Müller-Thurgau was invented by
Swiss vine breeder Hermann Müller at the famous Geisenheim viticultural station in 1882.
It is a cross of riesling and Madeleine royale. Müller-Thurgau is not the only cross in
Germany. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, plant scientists there
developed a slew of them. The goal was to come up with a new variety that would be less
fragile than riesling, ripen earlier, give higher yields, and at the same time have riesling’s
complexity and flavor. Today such crosses as Scheurebe and rieslaner make good and
sometimes excellent wines, but they are rarely matches for riesling.
    Germany’s red wines are well loved—especially by the Germans. It is such a triumph
to make red wines this far north that the best German reds are expensive and are
immediately snapped up on the home turf. More than 35 percent of all German vineyard
land is devoted to red grapes, the most important and widespread of which is
spätburgunder (pinot noir), which, in Germany, makes a spicy/earthy, sleek red. (One of
the most impressive and beautiful pinot noirs I have ever experienced was the 1943 pinot
noir from Kloster Eberbach, a majestic monastery and wine estate in the Rheingau.
Although it was thirty years old at the time, and the grapes were harvested—by women
and children—in the extremely difficult years before the end of World War II, the pinot
noir was as lively and vivid as a pinot noir one-fifth its age.) Dornfelder, blauer
portugieser (a variety that has nothing to do with Portugal), and trollinger (the same as the
Italian/Austrian Tyrolian variety schiava grossa) are also popular red grapes. But most
surprising of all is syrah, which, while very new in Germany, has been made into some
surprisingly delicious reds evocative of wild herbs and game.
   Throughout the later Middle Ages, the impressive monolithic Kloster Eberbach, founded in 1136 in Eltville in the
Rheingau, was one of the most economically successful Cistercian monasteries in Europe thanks to its remarkable wines.


                                     WALL OF THE VIRGINS
           Although Germany would seem like the last country to give its vineyards whimsical
           names, there are dozens of them. Here are the names of a few well-known vineyards.
           ESELSHAUT: Donkey hide
           GOLDTRÖPFCHEN: Little raindrops of gold
           HIMMELREICH: Kingdom of heaven
           HONIGSÄCKEL: Honey pot, with a sexual connotation
           JESUITENGARTEN: Garden of the Jesuits
           JUFFERMAUER: Wall of the virgins
           KALB: Veal
           KATZENBEISSER: The biter of cats
           LUMP: Dope; idiot
           NONNENGARTEN: Nun’s garden
           SAUMAGEN: Pig’s stomach
           SCHNECKENHOF: Home of the snails
           SIEBEN JUNGFRAUEN: Seven virgins
           UNGEHEUER: Monster
           WÜRZHÖLLE: Spice hell
           ZWEIFELBERG: Place of doubt
 The steep-terraced vineyards of Herzöglicher Weinberg in Saale-Unstrut in far northern Germany. Vineyards here are
                                 often interspersed among stunning medieval castles.

    As for the land and the vineyards, while Germany’s entire wine production amounts to
well under 5 percent of the world’s total, there are more than twenty thousand grape
growers. The best estates are often minuscule. A top Bordeaux château produces more
wine in a vintage than a top German estate produces in a decade. And yet, despite its small
size, a first-rate German winery will produce ten or more wines, and thirty to forty wines
is not uncommon. As we’ll see, this is because most vintners are working with a number
of different vineyard sites, different grape varieties, different ripeness levels, and different
sweetness levels—and keeping every single one of those wines separate. Such exacting
detail makes for dozens of different wines, and of course such exacting detail is what
makes German wine, well… German.
   Wineries are usually located in small villages at the edge of the vineyards. Indeed,
German wine labels often give not only the winery name, but also the town and vineyard
names. In the past, knowledgeable German wine drinkers (like Burgundy drinkers) bought
wines based first on the reputation of the vineyard, then on the producer’s name. But
consider: Until 1971, there were more than thirty thousand individual vineyard names a
wine drinker might encounter! These were reorganized by sweeping wine laws in 1971
and pared down to about 2,600 vineyards—still a mind-boggling number.
   Germany is divided into thirteen wine regions. Two of these, Saale Unstrut and
Sachsen, formerly in East Germany, were added after reunification in 1989. Of the
thirteen, three are the most important—the Mosel, the Rheingau, and the Pfalz. These
three are the main regions we will examine in the pages to come, followed by shorter
briefs on six other regions. Lastly, just so you know these terms, Germany’s thirteen wine
regions are divided into thirty-nine districts called bereiche, which themselves are divided
into 167 so-called collections of vineyards, each called a grosslage. Every grosslage, in
turn, is made up of individual vineyard sites, each called an einzellage. As of 2013, there
were 2,658 einzellagen.
         UNDERSTANDING HOW GERMAN WINE IS
            ORGANIZED AND CATEGORIZED

Understanding how German wines are organized and categorized is not difficult, but it’s
not self-evident either. So, in my experience, it’s helpful to have someone take you
through, step by step in a logical manner. I’ll do my best in the pages that follow. First, let
me set the context, because in this case, context is critical.
   In Germany, with vineyards so far north, ripeness has always been the fulcrum around
which everything else revolves. As mentioned, however, climate change has thrown a
wrench (a good one) into the old system. Over the past decade, contemporary German
winemakers have been ecstatic to find themselves benefiting from a climate of which their
fathers could have only dreamed. But the dramatic shift in climate has also turned
Germany’s fine wine industry upside down and, for some vintners, created a whole new
way of thinking about and categorizing wines. Here lies the rub: Not all Germans have
adopted the new thinking. And almost worse, some Germans have adopted it only
partially.
    So for now, there are two main independent systems that exist more or less side by side.
I’ll call them the traditional system and the modern system. The traditional system has
been in place for many decades. The modern system was begun relatively recently by an
organization of some two hundred prestigious estates called the VDP (Verband Deutscher
Prädikatsweingüter, or Association of German Prädikat Wine Estates). Alas, to
understand German wine, you have to know both systems. And most important of all,
know that some wine estates are adopting the modern system bit by bit, creating a hybrid
world of their own between the two systems.
   One final point: In addition to the two main systems at work in Germany, some regions
—the Rheingau is one—have associations of members who have set up their own internal
regional systems, and their own classifications. While we won’t telescope down to these
small regional systems (many of which are currently in flux), I will address classification
terms you might see on wine labels that could prove confusing.
Grapes being crushed during the harvest in Germany.
                                  THE RIPENESS LEVELS
 In the traditional system, fine German wine can be made at six levels of ascending ripeness. The
 ripeness levels are:
 KABINETT: A wine made from grapes picked during the normal harvest; typically a light-bodied wine, low
 in alcohol, and usually dry or off-dry. Kabinetts are easy to drink and food friendly. German wine lovers
 typically drink them as casual dinner wines.
 SPÄTLESE: Spät means “late.” So spätlese wines are based on grapes harvested later than grapes for
 kabinett. They are fully ripened and make wines with greater fruit intensity and a slightly fuller body than
 kabinett wines. A spätlese may be dry or, like kabinett, may be off-dry. Even those with some sweetness,
 however, usually do not taste sweet because of the high level of acidity in the grapes, which offsets any
 impression of sweetness.
 AUSLESE: Aus means “select.” Auslesen are made from very ripe grapes harvested in select bunches—
 another step upward in richness and intensity. Generally, auslesen can be made only in the best years,
 which have been sufficiently warm. Picking individual bunches means that the wines are expensive. Most
 auslesen are lush, and today, they are often fairly sweet. But even two decades ago, most auslesen were
 made in a lighter, more elegant style. Back then, most were intensely flavored (and thus, a treat), but
 they weren’t syrupy sweet. Today, both styles can be found, and the Germans sometimes drink them on
 Sunday afternoons as an aperitif with hard cheeses.
 BEERENAUSLESE: Literally, “berry” (beeren) selected harvest. Beerenauslesen are rare and costly
 wines made from very ripe individual grapes selected by hand. Usually beerenauslese (called,
 conveniently, BA for short) grapes have been affected by noble rot, Botrytis cinerea, giving them a deep,
 honeyed richness. BAs are always sweet.
 TROCKENBEERENAUSLESE: Literally, “dry berry” (trocken beeren) selected harvest,
 trockenbeerenauslesen (TBAs) are the richest, sweetest, rarest, and most expensive of all German
 wines. TBAs, produced only in exceptional years, are made from individual grapes shriveled to raisins by
 botrytis. It takes one person a full day to select and pick enough grapes for just one bottle. Because of
 the enormously concentrated sugar, the grapes have difficulty fermenting. As a result, many TBA wines
 are no more than 6 percent alcohol (less than half the alcohol of, say, Sauternes). TBAs are absolutely
 mesmerizing in their intensity and exquisite balance, and are rightfully pricey.
 EISWEIN: Literally, “ice wine,” so called because it is made from very ripe, frozen grapes that have been
 picked, often at daybreak, by workers wearing gloves so their hands don’t freeze. As the frozen grapes
 are pressed, the sweet, high-acid, concentrated juice is separated from the ice (the water in the grapes).
 The wine, made solely from the concentrated juice (the ice is thrown away), is miraculously high in both
 sweetness and acidity, making drinking it an ethereal sensation.
    Eiswein grapes must be frozen naturally on the vine. (Austria and Canada, two other countries famous
 for eiswein, also make it in this manner. In other countries, what is called “eiswein” is sometimes
 produced by freezing grapes in a commercial freezer. As far as purists are concerned, the freezer
 method is definitely cheating.) Interestingly, the climate change that has benefited German winemakers
 in so many ways may eventually prove detrimental to the production of eiswein because, under slightly
 warmer conditions, botrytis may occur first before temperatures turn cold enough for the eiswein to be
 made. In addition, under warmer conditions, the botrytis mold eventually consumes most of the water in
 the grapes, leaving little left to freeze!


THE TRADITIONAL SYSTEM
Historically, because ripeness was not a given and because the climate was so marginal,
fine German wines were categorized along two dimensions—ripeness and sweetness. This
system is still in place for many German wines, so it’s important to know the terms used to
indicate ripeness as well as the terms used for sweetness. In the traditional system, these
terms are usually indicated on the label.
THE RIPENESS CATEGORIES (in ascending ripeness):
KABINETT: (CAB-i-net)

SPÄTLESE: (SCHPATE-lay-zeh)

AUSLESE: (OWSCH-lay-zeh)

BEERENAUSLESE (BA):     (Bear-en-OWSCH-lay-zeh)
TROCKENBEERENAUSLESE (TBA): (TRAUK-en-bear-en-OWSCH-lay-zeh)

EISWEIN: (ICE-vine)
THE SWEETNESS CATEGORIES (from dry to sweet):

TROCKEN:   (bone dry; less than 0.9 percent residual sugar)
HALBTROCKEN; SOMETIMES CALLED FEINHERB:           (half dry; less than 1.8 percent residual
sugar)
LIEBLICH OR MILD:     (some sweetness; up to 4.5 percent residual sugar)
   Thus, any given ripeness level could potentially come at three levels of sweetness. A
kabinett, say, could be kabinett trocken (bone dry), kabinett halbtrocken (half dry), or
kabinett lieblich (slightly sweet). The same would be true for spätlese, and so on.
    When you understand how this two dimensional approach to flavor works, you can
easily imagine the sensory difference between a kabinett halbtrocken and an auslese
trocken. The first is not very ripe, but there’s some residual sugar in the wine. The second
is quite ripe, but it’s dry. The first wine, in other words, is like an unripe cantaloupe on
which you’ve sprinkled a touch of sugar; the second, a very ripe cantaloupe with no sugar.
Ripeness and sweetness are clearly different.
   As a quick aside, sweetness is measured by the grams of residual sugar in the final
wine. As for ripeness, it is measured in Germany by Oechsle (ERKS-leh)—the weight of
the must, which is the thick, pulpy liquid of crushed grapes. Oechsle was named after the
physicist Ferdinand Oechsle, who invented the scale in the 1830s. Interestingly, the
Oechsle requirements for the ripeness categories change based on the region. So, for
example, to make, say, a Rheingau spätlese, Rheingau producers must attain a higher
Oechsle reading from the grapes than Mosel producers need to attain to make a Mosel
spätlese. This is because in the Mosel, farther north and colder, it’s harder to reach greater
ripeness (which would result in a high Oechsle reading). So the system attempts to level
the playing field.
   Remember, the ripeness categories are based on the ripeness of the grapes when they
were picked (not the final sugar content of the wine). What happens, for a top vineyard, is
generally this: Come fall, the grower picks a percentage of the grapes early, well before
snow and cold weather set in. These are somewhat unripe, resulting in a very light wine (a
kabinett). Despite the risk of worsening weather, certain bunches of grapes are allowed to
continue to hang on the vine. Days or weeks later, the owner goes through the vineyard
again and, if bad weather has not spoiled the bunches, he picks some percentage of them
and uses those to make a separate, second wine (a spätlese), which will be riper and fuller-
bodied than the first. During this second go-through, the owner again leaves some bunches
to hang even longer. If freezing rain or snow doesn’t get those, the bunches will be made
into a third wine (an auslese), which will be fuller, richer, and riper than the second. And
so the process goes. There are six degrees of ripeness, and a grower in a good year may
make wines at all six levels from the same vineyard. Importantly, these categories of
ripeness often appear on the labels, allowing you to anticipate how lean or full the wine
will be.

                       READING A GERMAN WINE LABEL
         Germany is in the process (anticipated to take several years) of changing how many of
         its wines are categorized and labeled. For now, to the right is an example of a
         traditional German label. (By contrast, modern VDP labels are usually simpler and often
         omit the village and/or vineyard name.) As you can see, traditional labels indicate the
         producer, village, vineyard, variety of grape, ripeness level, sweetness level, and
         vintage. In the wine Selbach-Oster Zeltinger Sonnenuhr Riesling Spätlese Trocken
         2012, for example, Selbach-Oster is the producer; Zelting is the village (the er means
         “of”); Sonnenuhr is the vineyard; riesling is the grape variety; spätlese is the ripeness
         level; trocken is the dryness/sweetness level (trocken means “dry”); and 2012 is the
         vintage.




   As for dryness/sweetness, traditional German winemakers fine-tune the balance of
certain wines by leaving a little bit of sweetness in the wines or adding a touch of
süssreserve—juice from the harvested grapes that has been held back, clarified, and left
unfermented, so it’s naturally sweet.

THE MODERN (VDP) SYSTEM
With the turning of the twenty-first century, many growers, including more than two
hundred of the best and most prestigious estates of Germany, abandoned the traditional
way of thinking about, organizing, and categorizing German wines. In its place they
devised a modern system that, they believe, better reflects Germany’s new climatic reality.
Most of these wineries belong to a group called the VDP (Verband Deutscher
Prädikatsweingüter). All VDP members display the VDP logo (a stylized eagle bearing a
cluster of grapes) prominently on the bottle so it’s easy to tell who they are.
                                 WHAT IS PETROL, EXACTLY?
 One of the characteristics displayed by some rieslings —especially some aged rieslings—is called petrol
 —a potent, distinctive aroma that some wine drinkers love and others find unpleasant. Petrol aroma is
 caused by trimethyldihydronaphthalene—TDN for short—and several scientific research studies have
 found that the molecule is up to six times more likely to occur in riesling than in other varieties. While
 several factors may be responsible for TDN formation, one of the leading ones is too much sun exposure
 on riesling grapes as they grow. (Top riesling growers are always careful to allow leaves to slightly shade
 riesling clusters.) With bottle age, concentrations of TDN in the wine increase, especially if the wine is
 high in acidity. Interestingly, cork can absorb as much as 50 percent of any TDN formed, and thus
 rieslings stoppered with a screw cap potentially show more TDN than wines stoppered with cork. Finally,
 aged riesling has wonderfully complex aromas that can be hard to describe. Many riesling winemakers
 point out that “that unusual aroma” in an old riesling is often not TDN at all, but a fascinating nexus of
 smells including sage, lemongrass, lime marmalade, honey, consommé, and toast.

   The VDP’s premise is that, thanks to climate change, all of Germany’s best-sited, top
vineyards can now achieve full (spätlese- to auslese-level) ripeness every year. Therefore,
most wines will have a good measure of flavor intensity even when made in a dry style.
So, under the modern VDP system, most wines are bone dry, that is, trocken (which,
again, means less than .9 percent (9 grams per liter)—residual sugar).




 Old bottles of riesling await their moment of opening. Thanks to its high natural acidity, riesling ages longer than any
                                            other white varietal in the world.

   What happens, then, to terms like spätlese, auslese, and so on? Under the modern VDP
system, these terms (kabinett, spätlese, auslese, beerenauslese, and trockenbeerenauslese)
are used only to refer to sweet styles of wines. Thus, in the modern system, fine German
wine is dry unless you see a term such as kabinett, spätlese, et cetera, in which case, the
wine has some sweetness. (English majors and wine lovers will be driven crazy by the fact
that what are ripeness terms in the traditional system have now become sweetness terms in
the modern system.)
   The modern VDP system also includes a hierarchy of vineyards based on their terroirs.
The hierarchy is almost identical to the one in Burgundy, and has four levels. From the top
down, they are:
GROSSES LAGE = GRAND CRU
ERSTE LAGE = PREMIER CRU
ORTSWEIN = VILLAGE WINE
GUTSWEIN = BASIC WINE FROM A BASIC-QUALITY VINEYARD OWNED BY THE ESTATE

(The terms for the top two levels—Grosses Lage and Erstes Lage—will always appear on
either the label or the neck capsule. The terms Ortswein and Gutswein are optional
according to VDP regulations. Some wineries list them; others do not.)
   At the top level (equal to a Burgundy Grand Cru) is VDP Grosses Lage (pronounced
grosses lah-geh). These are wines from vineyards that have consistently yielded the finest,
most ageworthy wines. (As far back as the mid-eighteenth century, authoritative vineyard
maps demarcate many of these vineyards, singling them out as being especially prized.) A
Grosses Lage wine that is dry will usually carry an additional term on the label—Grosses
Gewächs (literally, “Great Growth”) or the initials GG. A Grosses Lage wine that is sweet
would carry one of the traditional terms: kabinett, spätlese, auslese, beerenauslese,
trockenbeerenauslese, or eiswein.
   The next step down (equal to a Burgundy Premier Cru) is VDP Erste Lage (urst lah-
geh). Continuing down, come wines that would be equal to Burgundian “village wines.”
These are called VDP Ortswein (orts vine). Finally, at the base of the quality pyramid are
VDP Gutswein (goots vine). These are good, entry-level wines made from grapes grown
in modest-quality vineyards owned by the estate.
                             STUNNING AGING POTENTIAL
 One of the benefits of acidity is that it acts to preserve flavor. Thus, German wines, among the highest in
 the world in acidity, are also among the longest-lived. If the wine in question also happens to be slightly
 sweet (sugar, too, is a preservative), it will age even longer. Probably every wine drinker familiar with
 German wine has been served a German wine and asked to guess its age. Say the wine in question has
 irresistible freshness; the fruit flavors (apricots and peaches) seem lively and poised for action; the
 minerality is vivid. Surely this wine cannot be more than a few years old. Then comes the reveal: It’s
 twenty years old or more. No other wines come close to German wines in their ability to seem ageless.

    While the changes are frustrating to learn, the new system adopted by these top VDP
estates is actually pretty easy. With it, German wine becomes like other high-quality wines
around the word—dry—unless a sweet style is being made, in which case there’s a term to
let you know that. Moreover, the system includes terms that alert you to the best terroirs.
Instead of having to know something about Kiedrich Gräfenberg (a village and vineyard)
on a label, if you see Grosses Lage, you know that you are about to drink Grand Cru–level
wine from one of Germany’s top sites.




 Many German churches, like this one in Oberwesel, are named Liebfraukirche (“Church of Our Blessed Lady”). The
   wine Liebfraumilch (“milk of our Blessed Lady”) originally came from vineyards surrounding such churches.
                                        SEKT

Possibly the easiest word to say in the German language, sekt (pronounced zekt) is the
term for sparkling wine. Although all sparkling wine in Germany is called sekt, there are
two distinct types—the bargain stuff and fine sekt.
   Bargain sekt—which is most of the sekt made—is light, clean, and uncomplicated.
Made with German grapes or with bulk wine from another European country, sekt’s
fizziness is the result of the bulk process (the second fermentation takes place in large
pressurized tanks, not in each individual bottle). Fine German sekt—a tiny portion of the
German sparkling wine market—is entirely different from the bargain stuff. These top-
notch sekte are made in small lots by the traditional (Champagne) method. The grapes
used are generally riesling, weissburgunder (pinot blanc), or blauburgunder (pinot gris),
and the village and vineyard the grapes come from will usually be listed on the label.
                                                BLUE NUN
 The first Liebfraumilch (literally, “milk of Our Blessed Lady”) wines were produced several centuries ago,
 probably from vineyards surrounding the Liebfraukirche (“Church of Our Blessed Lady”). The church was
 founded by Capuchin monks in 1296, just outside the city of Worms. Liebfraumilch is a basic, slightly
 sweetish, inexpensive wine made from a blend of any combination of Müller-Thurgau, riesling, silvaner,
 kerner, plus “other grapes.” For decades, the best-selling German wine in the English-speaking world
 was Sichel Liebfraumilch. By 1925, the wine had become so popular that the Sichels decided to create a
 more compelling label. It pictured a bunch of stern, no-nonsense, matronly German nuns in brown habits
 against a blue sky. (Nuns were used because of the close association, in Germany, of the church with
 wine.) Consumers began referring to the wine as the one with the blue label and the nuns. Slowly the
 label began to change. First there were fewer nuns; then the nuns were thinner; then the nuns smiled. By
 1958, the nuns were clothed in blue habits. Today, the label of Blue Nun shows a coquettish blonde with
 blue eyes wearing a pastel blue and white habit, holding a basket of grapes, and smiling in a way that
 would make the Mona Lisa envious.




  Tending to the vines in Germany usually means repeated (and exhausting) steep hikes up and down from the village
                                                      below.

   These fine German sekte are sparklers with bite. Their crisp, streamlined flavors are
vividly clear. The goal in making them is not to achieve the custardy, creamy roundness of
Champagne but to make a wine that has the clarity and purity of flute music. Among the
top producers: Darting, Theo Minges, Pfeffingen, Reichsrat von Buhl, and Bürklin-Wolf,
from the Pfalz; Hubert Gänz, from the Rheinhessen; Künstler from the Rheingau;
Schlossgut Diel from the Nahe; and Freiherr von Schleinitz and Kerpen, from the Mosel.
                          THE FOODS OF GERMANY

Maybe it’s the proximity of France and Italy, maybe it’s the irresistible romanticism the
cuisines of both those countries possess, but somehow Germany has been overshadowed
and undervalued as one of the great food cultures of Europe. This is definitely a mistake,
for food is Germany’s best-kept secret.
   There are really two culinary worlds there. First, there’s old-fashioned Germany, where
meals can resemble a medieval feast of wursts (sausages), pig’s knuckles, dumplings,
potato salad, spaetzle, sauerkraut, and black bread. This is solid, sturdy fare, a
straightforward response to the bodily needs imposed by a cold, damp northern climate.
But there’s also contemporary Germany, a land rich with game birds, wild mushrooms, a
huge repertoire of river fish (including delicate pike and trout), the sweetest cherries,
raspberries, and strawberries, plus bright green, tender garden cresses, mâche, and lettuces
that simply have no equal anywhere. Clearly, the German penchant for perfection doesn’t
stop with Porsches and Mercedes.
   To travel in Germany is to experience how deliciously and often these two worlds
collide. Still, some things—German breads, for example—remain steadfastly traditional.
As they should, for with the exception of Austria, there is no better bread in Europe.
Before I tasted German brot (“bread”), I used to wonder how so many Europeans in
centuries past supposedly lived on bread alone. One bite of brot was evidence enough.
Dark, chewy, heavy, nutritious, and so packed with flavor that it’s easily a meal in itself,
German bread has muscle. The most well known is pumpernickel, which historically in
Germany is leaden in weight, spicy-sour in flavor, and nearly black in color, thanks to the
high percentage of dark rye flour used, plus a long, slow baking, during which the flour’s
starches caramelize. The bread most capable of inducing a nostalgia attack, however, is
undoubtedly stollen, German Christmas bread, a yeast bread lavishly strewn with nuts and
candied fruits and then generously topped after baking with butter and confectioners’
sugar. Every region of Germany has its own version of stollen, including the fabulous
mohnstollen, poppy seed stollen, a specialty of Bavaria.

         IT TAKES A WHOLE LOTTA BEER TO MAKE GREAT
                            WINE
         The German passion for wine is very strong, but beer has no peer. In recent years
         Germans drank, per capita each year, about 28 gallons (106 liters) of beer; and just
         over 5 gallons (19 liters) of wine. Interestingly, Americans also drink about 28 gallons
         (106 liters) of beer per capita each year, and some states (hello, North Dakota—46
         gallons/174 liters of beer per capita per year!) take their six-packs very seriously. In the
         past, beer-making in Germany, like winemaking, was carried out by monks, who used
         the revenue from both to support their monasteries. Indeed, German monks made
         many of the most important discoveries in brewing, including the fact that hops could be
         used to add zestiness to beer and preserve its freshness.

   From bread to soup seems only a short distance (culinarily if not philosophically), and
Germany is a land of soups. There are the expected and sensational kartoff elsuppen
(“potato soups”) and many sturdy meat-and-vegetable-based soups (pheasant and lentil
soup, for example, or gulaschsuppe, Germany’s equivalent of Hungarian goulash), but
most surprising, perhaps, is the wealth of fish soups, including Hamburger aalsuppe (“eel
soup from Hamburg”) and Black Forest trout soup.
   The first time I visited Germany, I imagined that my vegetarian friends would find the
so-called land of wursts to be their worst nightmare. Not true. Germany’s passion for
vegetables and fruits has the intensity that only a culture where sun is scarce can possess.
Among vegetables, cabbage (called kraut or kohl, depending on the region) and asparagus
(spargel) stand out in such classic dishes as sauerkraut, the laborious authentic version (as
in neighboring Alsace) for which cabbages are shredded, salted, and fermented until they
are sweetly sour; braised red cabbage with onions and apples in wine sauce; and asparagus
sautéed with morels, for which many Germans forage. Each May, at asparagus season
(and asparagus mania), many chefs around Germany temporarily give up their regular
menus to focus entirely on dozens of different asparagus dishes.
     SOME OF THE MOST EXTRAORDINARY EISWEINS IN THE
                         WORLD
 The magnetic juxtaposition of lush sweetness and almost crinkly acidity gives German eiswein an
 electrified intensity. Made from frozen grapes picked in the dead of winter, eiswein tastes quite different
 from beerenauslesen and trockenbeerenauslesen. And unlike BAs and TBAs, eiswein is not made from
 grapes affected by Botrytis cinerea. Among the best German eisweins are those made by Darting, Eugen
 Müller, and Müller-Catoir, from the Pfalz; Hermann Dönnhoff and Schlossgut Diel, from the Nahe; and
 Joh. Jos. Prüm, Karlsmühle, Selbach-Oster, and Zilliken, from the Mosel.




        A road sign you don’t want to ignore—the Deutsche Weinstrasse (German Wine Route) in the Pflaz.

   As for the humble potato (kartoffel), the number of compelling German potato dishes
could make an Irish person (including this one) genuflect. There are infinite versions of
kartoffelklössen, “potato dumplings,” the classic accompaniment to Germany’s national
dish—sauerbraten, a “sour” pot roast in which the beef marinates in wine for up to four
days before being slowly braised until meltingly tender. Other homey potato standbys
include kartoffelpuffern, “potato pancakes,” and kartoffelsalat, “potato salad” (usually
served hot, often with bacon). When potatoes are not the accompaniment to a meal,
spätzle often is. Germany’s equivalent of gnocchi, these little squiggles of egg and flour
batter are pressed through a spätzle-maker (which looks like a potato ricer) and then, like
pasta, briefly boiled. Soft and rich, they are the perfect tool for sopping up sauces.
Throughout Germany, towns are located on flatland, while vineyards are planted on slopes, angled (like solar panels) to
                                   catch the maximum amount of sun each day.


                                    CALLING ALL DOCTORS
     Many German estates are named Doctor Something (Dr. Loosen, Dr. Bürklin-Wolf, Dr. von Bassermann-
     Jordan, and so on), as are many vineyards (the Doctor Vineyard in Bernkastel, owned by Dr. H.
     Thanisch, for example). For the Germans, taking pride in one’s professional status is essential, and
     having a PhD or titled degree—that is, being a doctor—has been extremely important for generations.

    And those sauces often surround meat. It would be a bit of a shame not to indulge in
meat in Germany, for the pork and beef are sumptuous. In addition to sauerbrauten, there
are numerous hearty interpretations of beef stew, veal dishes simmered in riesling, and
Wiener schnitzel (an Austrian dish, very popular in Germany, of pounded, breaded, and
sautéed veal medallions). And wursts are so much a part of the German psyche that they
figure into everyday language. (When a difficult decision must be made, the Germans say
Es geht um die Wurst—“the wurst is at stake.”) German wurst is rather like French cheese,
a way of defining regions culinarily. There are reportedly more than 1,500 different kinds
of wursts in Germany, the most famous of which are frankfurters (authentic versions are
still made in the city of Frankfurt, entirely from pork leg meat, and are served with hearty
mustard), leberwurst (“liverwurst;” made from pork or beef with a texture that ranges
from coarse to as smooth and silky as pâté), and bratwurst (spicy, coarsely textured pork
sausages seasoned with caraway). Finally, there’s currywurst, Germany’s über-loved,
ubiquitous fast food. It’s as simple as steamed, then fried, pork sausage seasoned with
curry ketchup.
   Germany, a country of immense forests, is known for the quality of its game as well,
and Germans use it to create venison with chestnuts, wild rabbit braised in wine, pheasant
with red currant gravy, and on and on.
   Desserts would seem to be a German birthright, as the number and scope of bäckereien
and konditoreien (bakeries and pastry shops) attest. Many of the best desserts are based on
fruits, for stone fruits such as cherries, orchard fruits like apples, and all manner of berries
—himbeeren (wild raspberries), johannisbeeren (fresh currants), and preiselbeeren
(similar to cranberries), in particular—excel in Germany. Among the classic desserts are
apfelstrudel, apple strudel, often made more like a cobbler than rolled in the Hungarian
manner; apfelpfannkuchen, apple pancakes; and zwetschgenkuchen, a plum “cake” that
looks like an open-faced pie, oozing with ripe, purple plums. Quark, often served with
peaches or cherries, brings back childhood memories for virtually every German.
Something like a cross between cream cheese and ricotta, quark is thick and tart,
quintessential comfort food. Finally there are cherries—kirschen—har-vested from the
cherry orchards that flourish along the Rhine River. Distilled into a clear brandy, or eau-
de-vie, cherries become kirschwasser, a favorite after-dinner digestif as well as an integral
component in Germany’s hedonistic chocolate dessert Black Forest cake. But cherries and
kirschwasser know few limits. The Germans use them in everything from cherry tortes to
cherry puddings to cherry pancakes served warm with whipped cream infused with, what
else? Kirschwasser.




            Above the village of Cochem, the Mosel River takes one of its breathtaking hairpin turns.
                  WHEN YOU VISIT… GERMANY
GERMANY IS FULL OF SMALL, family-owned wine estates that are welcoming and
charming to visit.
IN THE MOSEL there are impressive wine estates all along the Mosel Weinstrasse
(Mosel Wine Route), which runs the entire length of the winding river. The best of them,
and the most spectacular towering walls of vineyards, are concentrated in the middle
stretch.
BESIDES SPECTACULAR WINE ESTATES in the Rheingau, do not miss Kloster
Eberbach, in Eltville, a stunning, large monastery and wine estate founded in 1135 by
Cistercian monks. One of the earliest known properties to be devoted to pinot noir, it
was among the most successful, creative wine estates of the Middle Ages, a reputation
it held for the subsequent seven centuries. Today, Kloster Eberbach is operated by the
local state government and very good wines continue to be produced there. Also worth
seeing are two very famous, beautiful old castle/wine estates, Schloss Johannisberg
and Schloss Vollrads.
IN THE PFALZ, there are top estates strung all along the Deutsche Weinstrasse
(German Wine Route), not to mention immaculate villages with cobbled streets and
charming old houses. Try the Weinkastell Zum Weissen Ross, a charming inn and
restaurant specializing in regional dishes. It’s next door to the wine estate Koehler-
Ruprecht and is owned by the same family.
THE MOSEL

The Mosel is where Germany’s most ravishingly elegant wines are made. The wine region
—some 21,700 acres (8,800 hectares)—is defined by the hauntingly beautiful and eerily
still Mosel River, which cuts a deep, snakelike gorge through the land. The river enters
Germany where the country converges with Luxembourg and France, and then winds back
and forth for about 145 miles (230 kilometers) northeast until it empties into the Rhine
near the town of Koblenz. The Saar and the Ruwer are small tributaries of the Mosel.
   The Mosel’s greatest grape is riesling. But that states the case too simplistically, for
along the Mosel, riesling is turned into wines that have such crystalline clarity, they are
like glittering sunlight on a subzero day.
   The reasons are several. The vineyards of the Mosel are the steepest in Germany and
among the steepest in the world. Indeed, the expanse of vineyards from the village of
Zelting to the village of Bernkastel is considered the longest stretch of near-vertical
vineyards anywhere on the globe. (As an aside, the severe inclines make these vineyards
the most treacherous, dangerous, and exhausting to work of vineyards anywhere. Picture
the typical vineyard worker, often a woman of about sixty years of age, who climbs these
perilously steep, icy slopes in the middle of frigid November.) The vineyards are also
among the most northern vineyards in Germany. Steepness in a cold, northern wine region
means that the sun is in contact with the vines for limited, precious hours each day. And,
of course, the total number of sunlight hours during the growing season is also modest (the
Mosel gets, in a good year, about a third of the sunlight hours that Provence does).
                  THE STEEPEST VINEYARD IN THE WORLD
 The steepest vineyard in Germany—and in the world—is Calmont, located between the villages of
 Bremm and Eller on the Mosel River. The vineyard, whose name roughly translates to rocky mountain,
 was carved by the Mosel more than 400 million years ago, and has been planted with grapes for more
 than 1,500 years. Calmont’s 60- to 70-degree incline makes it look like a vertical wall of vines, all
 tenaciously gripping the slatey cliff.
    Terraces are built into the hill and fortified with rock walls, but they are constantly crumbling into the
 river and needing to be rebuilt. There are no roads through Calmont, only winding paths and one
 miniature monorail for bringing fertilizer up and harvested grapes down—everything else must be carried
 by the vineyard crew. In fact, because of the back-breaking labor required to harvest the vineyard, only
 13 of its 20 acres (5 of its 8 hectares) are currently in production, and that number is decreasing every
 year.




               The famous grayish-blue slate of the Mosel holds heat well, helping riesling to ripen.

      On the palate, riesling is meant to move—to shimmer, to surge, to burst, to
      dance, to arc, to soar. Riesling has a rare trait—velocity. Of all varietals, it is
      the most kinetic and alive.

   If fine wine is to be made, then, vineyards must be nothing short of perfectly sited, so
that each ray of light and warmth is maximized. As a result, the Mosel’s vineyards hug
only south-facing slopes. At each turn of the river where the banks face north, the slopes
have no vines. In addition, the best vineyards are quite close to the river itself, for even the
reflection of light off the water becomes one more increment in the quest for ripeness.
   Then there’s the issue of slate. The famous slate (sometimes blue-gray in color,
sometimes burnt orange-red) of the Mosel is highly porous and heat retaining. The soil’s
porosity is an advantage in downpours, when powerful rains might otherwise cause mass
erosion. (When some slate does wash down the slopes, the precious rocks, so necessary
for ripeness, are immediately carried back up the hill.)
   The slate’s heat-retaining properties help advance ripeness. Indeed, in many of the best
vineyards, there appears to be no soil at all, just broken slate. But, in ways that remain
chemically and biologically mysterious, slate also appears to contribute to flavor. Wine
drinkers throughout history have cherished Mosel wines specifically for their slatey,
minerally, wet-rocks-in-a-cold-mountain-stream flavors. No other wines in Germany taste
quite the same.




  The vineyard of Würzgarten (“Spice Garden”) in the village of Ürzig is among the most renowned vineyards of the
             Mosel. Just hearing the words Ürziger Würzgarten is a promise of delicious things to come.

   Many of the top Mosel producers are clustered together in the middle section, known as
the Mittelmosel (middle Mosel). Here is where the famous villages of Bernkastel,
Piesport, Brauneberg, and Wehlen are found. Wines such as Piesporter Goldtröpfchen and
Bernkasteler Doctor are just two of the renowned examples from this tiny stretch of the
Mosel.
   The three renowned Sonnenuhr—Sundial—vineyards are also in the Mittelmosel. They
are the Wehlener Sonnenuhr, Brauneberger Juffer-Sonnenuhr, and Zeltinger Sonnenuhr.
The huge sundials that give them their names were built as far back as the early 1600s in
the sunniest part of three excellent slopes, so that vineyard workers would know when to
stop for lunch or for the day. Because the vines in the vicinity of the sundial also got the
most sun (and made the richest wine), the areas around the sundials soon came to be
considered separate vineyards. Today the Sonnenuhr vine-yards are among the best along
the Mosel. As in Burgundy, each of these vineyards has multiple owners who possess tiny
plots. Some two hundred wine estates own sections of the Wehlener Sonnenuhr, for
example.
                VILLAGES AND VINEYARDS OF THE MOSEL
 Wine labels for some top Mosel wines tell you where the grapes grew by listing the vineyard, or both the
 village and the vineyard, from which they come. Here are some to look for; the village names are in
 capital letters. More than one village may have a vineyard with the same name. For example, as this
 chapter suggests, many villages have a vineyard known as Sonnenuhr (“Sundial”).
 AYL: Kupp
 BERNKASTEL: Bratenhöfchen, Doctor, Graben, Lay, and Matheisbildchen
 BRAUNEBERG: Juffer and Juffer-Sonnenuhr
 ERDEN: Prälat and Treppchen
 GRAACH: Domprobst and Himmelreich
 MERTESDORF: Abstberg and Herrenberg
 OCKFEN: Bockstein and Herrenberg
 PIESPORT: Goldtröpfchen
 ÜRZIG: Würzgarten
 WEHLEN: Sonnenuhr
 WILTINGEN: Braune Kupp, Braunfels, and Gottesfuss
 ZELTINGEN: Himmelreich, Scharzhofberg, Schlossberg, and Sonnenuhr

   Because of the Mosel’s far northern latitude, and the spine-tingling acidity that results,
this is Germany’s best region for fully sweet wines. Yes, sweet wines. Indeed, the BAs,
TBAs, and eisweins from the Mosel never descend into gloppy sugar syrup. Instead, their
sweetness is taut, lifted, and vibrant. They almost prance with energy, thanks to the
counterpoint provided by acidity. This makes them unlike most other dessert wines in
Germany, and indeed in the world. Wine drinkers who generally don’t like dessert wines
usually go mad for these.




                  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF THE MOSEL
   Alfred Merkelbach • Carl Loewen • Clemens Busch • C. Von Schubert • Daniel Vollenweider • Dr. H.
Thanisch • Dr. Loosen • Egon Müller • Fritz Haag • Heymann Löwenstein • Joh. Jos. Christoffel • Joh. Jos.
Prüm • Karlsmühle • Karp-Schreiber • Markus Molitor • Max Ferd Richter • Milz-Laurentiushof • Reichsgraf
von Kesselstatt • Reinhard & Beate Knebel • Reinhold Haart • St. Urbans Hof • Schloss Lieser • Selbach-
                               Oster • von Hovel • Willi Schaefer • Zilliken




The sonnenuhr (“sundial”) in Zelting. In the Mosel, from medieval times onward, the vineyard around the sundial has
                      always been considered exemplary thanks to its perfect sun exposure.
                             The Mosel Wines to Know
The wines of the Mosel—where sheer exquisiteness meets profound intensity—have no parallel anywhere else in
the world. Some of the wines below are extremely bone dry; others are not quite as severely dry. But thanks to their
soaring acidity, all are meant to accompany a meal (unless, of course, a sweet wine is intentionally being made).

                                                    WHITES




                                                 SELBACH-OSTER
                       ZELTINGER SONNENUHR | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE | TROCKEN
                                                     100% riesling
I have known the Selbach family for some twenty years, and each time I taste their wines I am brought back to the
first, icy day, snow on the ground, that I walked (with their long-time U.S. importer, Terry Theise) into their parlor
to taste their rieslings. The wines were then, and remain still, classic, exquisite, slatey, minerally rieslings humming
with pinpoints of juicy acidity and imbued with mouthfuls of pristine fruit flavor. What I love most about them is
their back palate “center of gravity,” so that the biggest rush of flavors floods onto your palate a few seconds after
you start to taste the wines. This taut, elegant dry riesling from the Sonnenuhr vineyard is a cool, fresh, beauty of a
wine. Johannes Selbach is one of the most thoughtful winemakers on the Mosel and a great interpreter of the purity
that is “Moselness.”
                                       REICHSGRAF VON KESSELSTATT

                             GRAACHER JOSEPHSHÖFER | RIESLING | KABINETT
                                                     100% riesling
The exquisite Josephshöfer riesling kabinett of Reichsgraf von Kesselstatt zooms in on a luscious kaleidoscope of
fresh ripe peach, apricot, nectarine, and citrus flavors and then holds that flavor (like holding a music note) over the
entire impact of the wine. This is a pure, filigreed, slatey, spicy, traditional kabinett from a jewel of a vineyard.
Indeed, the tiny, steep Josephshöfer (with a slope inclination of 60 to 70 degrees!) was first planted 1,100 years ago
and belonged to a local monastery until it was purchased by the Kesselstatt counts in 1858. Today, it is owned and
run by the energetic Annegret Reh-Gartner.




                                                    DR. LOOSEN

                               ÜRZIGER WÜRZGARTEN | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE
                                                     100% riesling
Every time I drink this wine, I wonder if there are enough superlatives in the world for it. So I’ll stop saying it is
great, exquisite, refined, and majestic (although it is all of those). Instead, here’s what it’s like: Melted crystals of
white light. Frozen peaches and apricots liquefied until they have no more weight than air. Minerals that have
turned deliciously crunchy. High soprano notes that reverberate long after the song is finished. The Würzgarten
(spice garden) vineyard in the village of Ürzig is, needless to say, renowned. Dr. Loosen is a two-hundred-year-old
estate now run by the indefatigable Ernst Loosen. In 1999, Ernst Loosen formed a joint venture with Washington
State’s Chateau Ste. Michelle, and together the two produce Eroica, the best riesling made on the West Coast of the
United States.
                                               KARP-SCHREIBER

                      BRAUNEBERGER JUFFER SONNENUHR | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE
                                                    100% riesling
The dazzling acidity in Karp-Schreiber’s riesling from the great Juffer Sonnenuhr vineyard in Brauneberg is like an
arch held in perfect, seemingly weightless suspension, rendering everything around it graceful and light. Again, this
is Mosel riesling that can’t hold still. Flavors of nectarines and peaches splash around in the glass, giving the wine
kinetic excitement. The Juffer Sonnenuhr (Virgin Sundial) vineyard of the village of Brauneberg (Brown Hill) is
one of the three centuries-old sundials that still exist on the Mosel.




                                               REUSCHER-HAART

                          PIESPORTER GOLDTRÖPFCHEN | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE
                                                    100% riesling
The name of this vineyard, Goldtröpfchen, means drops of gold, and that describes how you feel drinking it—as if
you’re drinking plump golden drops of pure sunlight. As a village, Piesport is known for its rather fleshy, fruity
rieslings, but the Schwang family, which owns Reuscher-Haart, must have a sixth sense of how to corset all that
richness, for this Goldtröpfchen is elegant and laced with spices (teeing it right up for something like a Vietnamese
pork, shrimp, and mint spring roll).
                                                 WILLI SCHAEFER

                              GRAACHER HIMMELREICH | RIESLING | AUSLESE
                                                     100% riesling
This mind-blowing wine is not as dry as the others listed in this section but it’s definitely not a dessert wine. I’ve
drunk it with everything from complex Shanghai seafood dishes to Southeast Asian appetizers to creamy French
cheeses, and the experience has been nothing short of sensational. Willi Schaefer and his son Christophe and
daughter-in-law Andrea date their winemaking ancestry back to 1121. Their wines have mesmerizing laser-like
focus, and end with an explosion of flavor that always reminds me of cymbals clashing. From the famous
Himmelreich (Kingdom of Heaven) vineyard in Graach, this auslese is a tight fist of minerals robed in apricot
glaze.

                                                      SWEET
                The wines below are all definitely sweet and are generally served with or as dessert.
                                            MILZ-LAURENTIUSHOF
                    TRITTENHEIMER FELSENKOPF | RIESLING | BEERENAUSLESE
                                                   100% riesling
The aroma of a great BA can be hypnotic—deep, rich, sweet fruits, of course, but also smells of the earth, like rain
sprinkling down on mushrooms and stones (an indication of botrytis). This one, from the Milz family of Milz-
Laurentiushof, is supercharged in every way. Indeed, the flavors of pears, tangerine, apricots, and minerals box their
way into every corner of your mouth. All the while, the wine’s dramatic, edgy acidity keeps unfolding and holding
the sweetness in a suspended state of dazzling balance.




                                           JOH. JOS. CHRISTOFFEL

                               ÜRZIGER WÜRZGARTEN | RIESLING | EISWEIN
                                                    100% riesling
The tiny estate of Joh. Jos. Christoffel makes digitally precise Mosel rieslings with wonderful rushes of slate,
minerals, and restrained fruit that parcels itself out to you over many agonizingly delicious seconds. They are
exquisitely classical in their structure—which bodes well when it comes to eiswein. There’s nothing over-the-top
and overwrought here. Instead, Christoffel’s eisweins—especially this one from the fantastic Würzgarten vineyard
in Ürzig—taste as though long, satin ribbons of honey, spice, and exotic citrus have twisted together and entwined
themselves with crystalline acidity in an unnervingly luscious helix of sensation. Needless to say, these eisweins are
made in minuscule amounts, and only in very special years when the climatic conditions are just right.
                                                  FRITZ HAAG

           BRAUNEBERGER JUFFER-SONNENUHR | RIESLING | TROCKENBEERENAUSLESE
                                                   100% riesling
This wine has moved German men to tears—which, in a way, says it all. The sheer beauty of it is like the beauty of
exquisite music that touches you so deeply that crying is the only rational response. Wines like Fritz Haag’s TBA
remind us that, at their pinnacle, the greatest wines of the world cannot be deconstructed into their component parts
or described by adjectives. (Apricot, after all, is not as apricot as this. Honey, not as honeyed. Minerals, not as
minerally.) Wines like this have what I’ll call high-alert emotional purity. They are electrifying to the senses, and
drinking them becomes an out-of-body experience.
THE RHEINGAU

Cermany’s reputation as the greatest white-wine producing nation in the world was
historically based largely on the Rheingau region. Today, the supremacy of this very small
region (7,744 acres/3,134 hectares) is challenged by many delicious wines coming out of
the Mosel and the Pfalz, yet the Rheingau has the longest history of quality winemaking of
any region in Germany. It’s also a hotbed for regional classification systems, more on
which in a moment.
    The Rheingau is a serene, aristocratic wine region—one long, virtually continuous
horizontal slope, a rolling carpet of vines, with the densely forested Taunus Mountains
rising up behind. In a sense, the mountains created the wine region, for they abruptly
halted the Rhine’s northward flow and forced it to veer straight west for 20 miles (32
kilometers) until it could again proceed north. The result was a nearly ideal, immense,
south-facing bank backed by protective forests that block cold northern winds.
   The leading grape of the Rheingau is riesling. Indeed, the first record of riesling being
planted in Germany dates from 1435 at the wine estate (and former Benedictine abbey)
Schloss Johannisberg in the village of Johannisberg near Geisenheim in the Rheingau.
Today, of all the German wine regions, the Rheingau has the highest percentage of riesling
—nearly 80 percent of its acreage. The rieslings here, however, are entirely different from
Mosel rieslings—richer, rounder, earthier, and more voluptuous. Absent are the Mosel’s
icicle-like sharpness and slate flavors, and in their place is a near perfect gripping
expression of lip-smacking fruit. The best Rheingau wines have amazing breadth; in a sip
they can suggest everything from violets and cassis to apricots and honey.




The castle of Ehrenfels in Rüdesheim on the Rhine. Rüdesheim, one of the main wine towns in the Rheingau, is home to a
number of legendary vineyards, including Berg Roseneck, Berg Rottland, Berg Schlossberg, and Bischofsberg. (The word
                                                berg means “hill.”)

   Sun, soil, and latitude make the difference. To begin with, the Rheingau is farther south
than the Mosel. Its long, south-facing bank rises up gently from the river, which for its
part acts like a giant sunlight reflector. And the soil is not solely slate, but a vast mixture,
including loess, loam, limestone, marl, sand, and quartzite.
                          THE FIRST BOTRYTIZED WINES
Four countries—Germany, France, Austria, and Hungary—are famous for their botrytized wines, and of
the four, Hungary was the first to understand that grapes covered with the rather repulsive-looking mold
Botrytis cinerea could lead to sensationally delicious wine. As of the early 1600s, the Tokaji Aszú wines
of Hungary’s Tokaj-Hegyalja region were well-established luxuries. And, although it is not clear if Austria
adopted the technique from Hungary, the part of Austria famous for botrytized wines—Burgenland—
borders Hungary, and indeed was once part of the vast Austro-Hungarian Empire. In Germany, the first
botrytized wine, thought to have been a spätlese, was made in Rheingau at Schloss Johannisberg, in
1775. In Bordeaux, evidence is more sketchy, but the earliest accounts of botrytized wine are thought to
date from 1847 at the famous Sauternes estate Château d’Yquem.
             VILLAGES AND VINEYARDS OF THE RHEINGAU
 Wine labels for some top Rheingau wines tell you where the grapes grew by listing the vineyard, or both
 the village and the vineyard, from which they come. Here are some to look for; the village names are in
 capital letters. As in the Mosel, more than one village may have a vineyard with the same name. For
 example, there’s a Hölle vineyard in Hochheim and one in Johannisberg. Speaking of Johannisberg
 (named for Saint John the Baptist), such was the reputation of the village that, in the nineteenth century,
 German immigrants to the United States renamed the riesling vine cuttings they brought with them
 Johannisberg riesling.
 ASSMANNSHAUSEN: Frankenthal, Hinterkirch, and Höllenberg
 ELTVILLE: Langenstück, Rheinberg, and Sonnenberg
 ERBACH: Marcobrunn, Schlossberg, and Siegelsberg
 GEISENHEIM: Kläuserweg, Mönchspfad, and Rothenberg
 HALLGARTEN: Jungfer and Schönhell
 HATTENHEIM: Nussbrunnen, Pfaffenberg, and Wisselbrunnen
 HOCHHEIM: Herrnberg, Hölle, and Königin Victoriaberg
 JOHANNISBERG: Goldatzel, Hölle, Klaus, and Vogelsang
 KIEDRICH: Gräfenberg and Wasseros
 RAUENTHAL: Baiken, Gehrn, and Rothenberg
 RÜDESHEIM: Berg Roseneck, Berg Rottland, Berg Schlossberg, and Bischofsberg
 WINKEL: Hasensprung and Jesuitengarten

   The slightly stronger sun, of course, leads to greater—or at least more reliable—
ripeness, which in turn gives Rheingau wines their slightly fuller body and pronounced
fruit. At the same time, high acidity in the grapes acts as a counterpoint, providing the
wines with a kind of arching elegance. The potential for greater ripeness here bodes well
for Rheingau spätlesen, auslesen, beerenauslesen, and trockenbeerenauslesen. These
wines are legendary—the sort that make you want to lick the glass after swallowing the
last drop.
   The other important grape of the Rheingau is spätburgunder (pinot noir), which here
makes a pale but spicy red with a kind of bitter-almond flavor. The most famous come
from the village of Assmannshausen and are expensive.
Founded in 1234, the Kloster Marienthal convent in the village of Geisenheim in the Rheingau is the oldest Cistercian
                                              nunnery in Germany.




The steep, 60-degree slopes of the Berg Schlossberg vineyard in Rüdesheim on the Rhine River. With its quartzite and
                       slate soils, this vineyard is famous for its powerful, racy, dry rieslings.


                                                    HOCK
    The British name for Rhine wine, hock, is an Anglicized reference to the famous village of Hochheim
    (pronounced HOE-hime) in the Rheingau. At first, hock implied a wine from Hochheim; later, it came to
    mean any Rheingau wine; and later still, any Rhine wine. Queen Victoria is credited with the line, “A
    bottle of hock keeps off the doc.”
   Finally, the Rheingau is where the long road to German wine classification began. In
1984, for example, Rheingau producers founded an association called Charta, which
sought to classify the best vineyard sites in that region. After twenty-five years and many
evolutions, a Germany-wide system of classification is now under the auspices of the
VDP, Verband Deutscher Prädikatsweingüter, or Association of German Prädikat Wine
Estates, an association of more than two hundred top estates throughout the country. But
despite the VDP’s prominence and strength, smaller regional Rheingau associations still
exist. One such—the Rheingauer Weinbauverband (the Rheingau Winegrowers’
Association)—classifies wines using terms very much like those of the VDP. For example,
wineries that belong to the Rheingauer Weinbauverband, designate their top wines Erstes
Gewächs (“First Growth”), a term that, confusingly, resembles two VDP terms: Erstes
Lage (a First Class or “Premier Cru” vineyard) and Grosses Gewächs (a “Great Growth”
wine that is dry).
               SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF THE RHEINGAU
 August Kesseler • Fred Prinz • Georg Breuer • Josef Leitz • Kloster Eberbach Hessische Staatsweinguter •
    Künstler • Peter Jakob Kühn • Robert Weil • Schloss Johannisberg • Schloss Schönborn • Spreitzer
                          The Rheingau Wines to Know
The Rheingau wines below are all vividly intense, humming with acidity, and all taste dry. Each has a profound
depth of flavor. Historically, the Rheingau was Germany’s first great wine region, and the wines have incomparable
gravitas.

                                                     KÜNSTLER




                     HOCHHEIMER KIRCHENSTÜCK | RIESLING | GROSSES GEWÄCHS
                                                     100% riesling
Künstler, one of the stars of the Rheingau, is making some of the most exciting, precise, and filigreed rieslings in
the region. From the Grosses Lage (“Grand Cru”) vineyard Kirchenstück (literally “church song”) in the famous
village of Hochheim comes this Grosses Gewächs (“Great Growth”) dry riesling. Suffused with peach, mirabelle,
and kumquat flavors that rush out of the glass, it also fairly bursts with sophisticated notes of chalk, minerals, salts,
and an ever-so-wonderful fruit-pit bitterness. The finish is a long beam of bright light. Künstler, a small, family-run
estate, is headed by Gunter Künstler, a driving force in the Rheingau wine industry.

                                                     SPREITZER




                            OESTRICHER LENCHEN | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE “303”
                                                     100% riesling
I always think of this just off-dry wine as one of the most aristocratic of traditional Rheingau rieslings. Ribbons of
ripe, sweet apricots and spice curl their way through pure minerals. The concentration of Spreitzer’s “303” spätlese
is always superb, and yet, for such concentration the wine reverberates with a sense of purity. The luxurious texture
feels like a spoonful of fresh honey, although, of course, this is not a dessert wine. The name “303” refers to a
subparcel of the Lenchen vineyard, called Eisenberg (“Iron Hill”). It was from this hill, in 1921, that the fruit for a
TBA with one of the then-highest levels of Oechsle ever recorded—303 degrees Oechsle—was picked.

                                                   ROBERT WEIL




                        KIEDERICH GRÄFENBERG | RIESLING | GROSSES GEWÄCHS
                                                     100% riesling
The best dry rieslings of Robert Weil have immense power and depth, yet at the same time they possess a
lusciousness and a vivid, crystalline sense of minerality. In particular, I love this riesling’s exotic flavors, as if
peaches were dipped in an especially bergamot-rich Earl Grey tea. And the way the opulent fruit wraps itself
around the central spine of acidity is fantastic. Not surprisingly, this wine is ranked a Grosses Gewächs (“Great
Growth”). The winery was founded in 1875 and is still run by the Weil family. Over the decades, the winery has
been an official purveyor of riesling to the royal families of Germany, Austria, and Russia.

                                                   JOSEPH LEITZ
                         RÜDESHEIMER BERG ROSENECK | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE
                                                    100% riesling
Leitz’s top rieslings are wines of razor-sharp precision, and this one from Berg Roseneck, in the village of
Rüdesheim, builds on that precision with a blast of a cool, exotic aroma—something gingery maybe?—before the
wine seems to drape itself like peach syrup over rocks. Leitz’s wines often have a tightness and edginess that I love.
Indeed, though this is just off-dry, it drinks like a dry wine. The Rüdesheimer berg, or “hill,” is a south-facing,
mountainlike slope that soaks up the sun. On it are three famous vineyards, one of which, Roseneck, is marked by
quartzite with small shards of slate.

                                        SCHLOSS REINHARTSHAUSEN




                        ERBACHER SCHLOSSBERG | RIESLING | ERSTES GEWÄCHS
                                                    100% riesling
Fresh. Lively. Slatey. Dry. A bullet train of intense fruit and rocky minerals that hurl themselves at you. I’m never
sure if I should duck or drink. The finish is a bold exclamation point… but then, a second later, the wine comes
whispering back. I’m not done with you yet, it seems to say. Schloss Reinhartshausen belongs to the Rheingauer
Weinbauverband (Rheingau Winegrowers’ Association), the members of which use the term Erstes Gewächs (“First
Growth”) for their top wines. The winery is one of the oldest in Rheingau, having been founded in the mid-
fourteenth century, and today it is the largest privately owned winery in the region. Princess Marianne of Prussia
founded Hotel Kempinski, the five-star hotel attached to the winery.
THE PFALZ

For two decades, the Pfalz has been among the most exciting, inventive wine regions in
Germany. Pfalz growers have an irrepressible spirit and their own irreverent way of doing
things. The buttoned-down image of German winemaking doesn’t hold here. Individuality
and creativity are prized above all. Not surprisingly, Pfalz winemakers make more great
wines from more different types of grapes than winemakers anyplace else in Germany.
Indeed, just 24 percent of Pfalz’s 58,041 acres (23,488 hectares) is planted with riesling,
although given this region’s large size, that’s still a considerable amount, as we’ll see. The
wide variability of soils here is another key to the diversity of wines and flavors. There is
little slate; instead, limestone, loess, gravel, and well-drained red sandstone dominate.
   Although it is technically part of Germany’s Rhineland, the Pfalz does not take its
climatic cues from the Rhine River, as the other regions do. The river is a couple of miles
east; no important vineyards border it. The dominant influence instead is the Haardt
mountain range, the northern flank of France’s Vosges mountains. Just as the Vosges
create a sunny, dry climate for Alsace wines, so the forested mountains of the Haardt
create a protected environment for the vineyards of Pfalz.
   Given its more southerly latitude and more generous sun, ripeness is more of a given.
Pfalz wines, as a result, are almost extroverted with fruit. Acidity, the soul of German
wine, comes across differently here, too. It’s not harsh or piercing; it doesn’t howl.
Instead, the best Pfalz wines have an almost creamy acidity and a tensile energy that’s
palpable. Finally, because of the slightly greater levels of ripeness and the softer
impression of acidity, the bone-dry (trocken) wines of the Pfalz are far less starched and
severe than the trocken wines of the Mosel.
                Weingut Pfeffingen in the Pfalz. Winemaking here dates back to the Roman Empire.

   Pfalz producers such as Müller-Catoir, Messmer, Darting, Lingenfelder, A. Christmann,
and Eugen Müller make some of Germany’s most sensational wines. In particular, words
do not describe how fiercely vivid Müller-Catoir wines can be. But it’s not vividness
alone. There’s a precision in every Müller-Catoir wine that is breathtaking. Like flashing
sushi knives. Like sunlight bouncing off icicles.




                                                  PFALZ
    The name Pfalz derives from the Latin palatinus, meaning “palace.” A palatine was a lord with royal
    privileges and the palatinate was the area he ruled. Today in Britain, the Pfalz is often called the
    Palatinate because it was once controlled by palatine counts.

   In actual acres, the Pfalz has, after the Mosel, the most vineyard area planted with
riesling. But Pfalz riesling is different—perhaps more eccentric. Some of these wines
possess exotic citrus flavors; others taste so gingery-peppery you want to grab a bottle and
dash off to the nearest Thai restaurant.
                   VILLAGES AND VINEYARDS IN THE PFALZ
 Wine labels for some top Pfalz wines tell you where the grapes grew by listing the vineyard, or both the
 village and the vineyard, from which they come. Here are some to look for; the village names are in
 capital letters. As in the Mosel and Rheingau, more than one village may have a vineyard with the same
 name.
 DEIDESHEIM: Grainhübel, Hohenmorgen, Kieselberg, and Leinhöhle
 FORST: Freundstück, Jesuitengarten, Kirchenstück, Musenhang, and Ungeheuer
 GIMMELDINGEN: Langenmorgen, Mandelgarten
 KALLSTADT: Saumagen
 KONIGSBACH: Indig
 MUSSBACH: Eselshaut
 RUPPERTSBERG: Hoheburg, Nussbien, and Reiterpfad
 UNGSTEIN: Bettelhaus and Herrenberg
 WACHENHEIM: Böhlig, Gerümpel, Goldbächel, and Rechbächel




Pfalzgrafenstein Castle on the Rhine River, opposite the town of Kaub, was built in 1327 to collect tolls from ships and
 barges that used the river to transport and trade goods. Heavy chains from the castle walls to the shore helped force
 compliance. Resisting paying the toll could land the ship’s crew in the castle’s “dungeon”—wooden floats in a well.


                                                SAUMAGEN
    No visit to the Pfalz is complete without tasting the region’s specialty, saumagen, the belly of a pig stuffed
    with pork, potatoes, and spices. Of course, saumagen should be accompanied by a riesling from the
    Saumagen vineyard in Karlstadt, a famous—playfully named—Pfalz vineyard owned by the Koehler-
    Ruprecht estate.

  But riesling is only one of several successful grapes in the Pfalz. The top estates make
small lots of many others, including gewürztraminer, weissburgunder (pinot blanc),
grauburgunder (pinot gris), and spätburgunder (pinot noir). These can make very good to
remarkably delicious wines, depending on the vintage and the winemaker. Several crosses
—rieslaner and Scheurebe, notably—are grown in the Pfalz, too. Rieslaner (a cross of
riesling and silvaner) makes pretty wines with pear and citrus flavors; and with its zany
grapefruity-vanilla tang, Scheurebe (a cross of riesling and an unknown grape) has a cult
following. The best producers of the latter include Müller-Catoir, Lingenfelder, and
Pfeffingen.
                   SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS IN THE PFALZ
  A. Christmann • Darting • Dr. Bürklin-Wolf • Dr. Deinhard • Dr. von Bassermann-Jordan • Dr. Wehrheim •
  Eugen Müller • Gies-Duppel • Klaus Neckerauer • Koehler-Ruprecht • Lingenfelder • Messmer • Müller-
              Catoir • Okonomierat Rebholz • Pfeffingen • Reichsrat von Buhl • Theo Minges
                              The Pfalz Wines to Know
As the stunning dry wines below demonstrate, the Pfalz is Germany at her most creative. Although I could
undoubtedly drink riesling every night of my life, the Pfalz has a few additional (delicious) ideas up her sleeve—in
the form of rieslaner, muskateller, gewürztraminer, and more.

                                                 SPARKLING




                                        REICHSRAT VON BUHL
                                                 RIESLING | BRUT
                                                    100% riesling
Made by the traditional (Champagne) method, Reichsrat von Buhl’s sekt is a foamy, delicious burst of freshness.
With its fine mousse, the wine has a tingling elegance. And the aromas and flavors are more sophisticated than you
find with many sekte. Indeed, the delicate white flower aromas are pretty, and on the palate there’s a delicious,
creamy nuttiness that suggests long contact with the lees. But it’s the beautiful notes of fresh, cold nectarine (that’s
riesling speaking) that make you want to keep sipping.

                                                    WHITES
                                                EUGEN MÜLLER
                    FORSTER KIRCHENSTÜCK | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE | TROCKEN
                                                   100% riesling
From the extraordinary Kirchenstück vineyard (full of limestone and basalt and considered one of the best, not just
in the Pfalz but in all Germany), Eugen Müller makes rieslings that are simply otherworldly. This spätlese, for
example, is mega-dry yet juicy, and as alive as an electrical current. The flavors are so tightly wound, they seem to
spring out at you as flashes of cool nectarine, salt-crusted minerals, and feathery herbs. The finish—with its touches
of spices and bitter marmalade made from exotic fruits—is extremely long.
                                                    MESSMER

                           BURRWEILER ALTENFORST | RIESLANER | SPÄTLESE
                                                   100% rieslaner
Rieslaner. The name suggests something rieslinglike, and indeed great rieslaner like this dry-ish one from Messmer
shares riesling’s sense of purity and freshness. But what happens next is all rieslaner. Namely, an onslaught of
luscious flavor. Rieslaner is richer and weightier than riesling, with mouthfilling flavors reminiscent of poached
pears, herbs, and wildflower honey if you remove most of the sweetness. And the texture—langorous right through
the long finish. The Messmer family (the name is spelled using the “long s” of, it is thought, the script known as
Fraktur; the letter β looks like a capital B but indicates a double s) specializes in a slew of delicious non-riesling
wines, including Scheurebe and gewürztraminer.




                                                MÜLLER-CATOIR

                 HAARDTER BÜRGERGARTEN | MUSKATELLER | KABINETT | TROCKEN
                                                  100% muskateller
Most fans of German wine would happily drink anything from Müller-Catoir; the wines are mind-blowing across
the board. But for sheer adventure, this ultra-dry muskateller (the name the Germans use for muscat blanc à petits
grains) is beautiful, dense, and very pure. First come exotic, fruity notes (star fruit, cherimoya, kumquat) and then
cool, herbal ones (spearmint and basil). A crunchy saltiness and a wild shiver of mineralty pierce through the whole
package. This is one of the best dry muscats in the world—its only competitors are the sensational dry muscats of
Alsace.
                                                 THEO MINGES

                             FROSCHKÖNIG | RIESLING | SPÄTLESE | TROCKEN
                                                   100% riesling
Great riesling is sheer; it is silk stockings—and in this case, the frog king (Froschkönig) is wearing them.
Froschkönig is the playful name the Minges family gives to its dry (trocken) riesling. I love the aromas of forests,
orchards, and rocks in this wine… as if many elements of nature had come together to sing in the glass. And while
dry, the wine does not vaporize your taste buds with starched severity. The Minges family (now in its sixth
generation as winegrowers) also makes beautiful, lightly sweet rieslings, especially the Flemingener Zechpeter, in
which apricots, minerals, ginger, earth, and cream all come together in a wild, perfect balance.




                                      DR. VON BASSERMANN-JORDAN

               FORSTER JESUITENGARTEN | RIESLING | TROCKEN | GROSSES GEWÄCHS
                                                   100% riesling
Dr. von Bassermann-Jordan’s riesling from the vineyard called Jesuitengarten (“Jesuit garden”) is riesling at warp
speed. The velocity behind the flavors in this wine is stunning. First, a hailstorm of spices and minerals. Then,
coming up bold and fast, surges of freshness like gusts of wet wind after it rains. Then, high soprano-like notes of
exotic citrus—kaffir lime, kumquat, and bergamot. Indeed, every element of the wine seems spring-loaded and
ready to burst onto the scene. It’s an enrapturing wine to drink because of its choreography. Also not to be missed:
Dr. von Bassermann-Jordan’s Deidesheimer Leinhöhle Riesling Auslese—an aria of apricots.
                                                 A. CHRISTMANN

                                     IDIG | RIESLING | GROSSES GEWÄCHS
                                                     100% riesling
The vineyard Idig, in the village of Köngisbach, makes rich (almost Burgundian-style) dry rieslings with intense
flavors reminiscent of candied orange peel, tropical fruits, and roasted nuts. The wines from Idig are classified
Grosses Gewächs, which again, is the VDP designation for a dry wine from an exceptional Grosses Lage (“Grand
Cru”) site. The south-facing, basin-shaped vineyard catches and holds the warmth of the sun, contributing to the
ripeness of the grapes. Also, importantly, the vineyard is laced with limestone, and indeed this wine possesses a
minerally, starched, chalky character similar to one of the flavors of a great Champagne. The A. Christmann winery
is now run by the seventh generation of the Christmann family.




                                                  THEO MINGES

                          EDITION ROSENDUFT | GEWÜRZTRAMINER | SPÄTLESE
                                                100% gewürztraminer
I could not resist writing about Theo Minges’s dry-ish gewürztraminer, as well as its riesling. Germany is not
known for gewürztraminer, especially since the French region of Alsace—where dry gewürztraminer reigns as
extraordinary—is virtually next door. But Theo Minges’s gewürztraminer, called Edition Rosenduft, is every bit the
equal of a top Alsace version. In fact, you might prefer it, since the high acidity in this wine lifts gewürztraminer up
and gives the flavor more energy. And what flavor—an intricate and mesmerizing exotic tropical/spicy boldness.
(Our whole office ordered out for Thai appetizers after we tasted this wine.) As is often true of the best German
wines, the crystalline purity is fantastic.
The Mittelrhein—the beautiful stretch of river from Bingen to Bonn—is full of medieval castles and fortresses. Many
 vineyards here are so steep that workers must be transported up the slopes by cable. The difficulty and expense of
                            working these vineyards has caused some to be abandoned.
OTHER IMPORTANT
WINE REGIONS

      AHR | BADEN | FRANKEN | MITTELRHEIN | NAHE | RHEINHESSEN

As some of the most historically significant white-wine regions in all of Europe, the
Mosel, Rheingau, and Pfalz are deservedly Germany’s best-known and most renowned
wine regions. But good—occasionally very good—wines are made in several neighboring
districts as well, including the Ahr, Baden, Franken, Mittelrhein, and especially the Nahe
and the Rheinhessen.

                              THE CASTLE IN THE RIVER
         Among the most impressive sights along the Mittelrhein is Pfalzgrafenstein Castle, a
         medieval castle smack in the middle of the narrow river. French novelist Victor Hugo
         called it “a ship of stone, eternally afloat upon the Rhine.” It was built on tiny Pfalz
         Island in 1327, with the purpose of collecting tolls (which it did until 1866). Working with
         fortified towns on either side of the river, the castle drew a giant chain across the Rhine
         to prevent boats that hadn’t paid the toll from passing through. Captains who still
         refused to pay were often thrown in the dungeon, a wooden plank afloat in a well.
         Pfalzgrafenstein Castle played a role in the fall of Napoléon Bonaparte because
         Prussian Field Marshall Blücher crossed the Rhine at this spot in 1813 and went on to
         deal Napoléon’s army a crushing blow.




                  The old terraced vineyards of the Ahr. Each vine is bound to a separate pole.
                                          AHR

One of Germany’s smallest wine regions, the Ahr is also the most northerly, after Sachsen
and Saale-Unstrut in the former East Germany. It is defined by the Ahr River, which flows
into the Rhine just south of Bonn, in the Mittelrhein. The rough, rocky, forested terrain is
beautiful. This region is a favorite wine country getaway for residents of Bonn.
   Although counterintuitive, most of the wine made here is red. Specifically, it is pale,
light spätburgunder (pinot noir)—decent enough but not usually remarkable. The top
producers include Kreuzberg, J. J. Adeneuer, Meyer-Näkel, and Jean Stodden.
                                        BADEN

The wines of Baden do not—and could not—have one single character, for this extremely
diverse region is made up of several large, noncontiguous chunks of land. One part of
Baden is in central Germany, not all that far from Würzburg; another is on the Bodensee
(Lake Constance) near Switzerland; and the biggest and most important part runs parallel
to the Rhine from Heidelberg all the way south to Basel.
   The southern part of this stretch—roughly from Basel to the famous spa town Baden-
Baden—is where the very top wines are to be found. Immediately west of this district is
France’s Alsace region, and to the east, the Black Forest. In particular, wines from the area
around the Kaiserstuhl (literally “emperor’s throne”), an extinct volcano, are prized.
   This is one of the warmest vineyard areas in Germany, and the wines taste like it. By
German wine standards, they’re very bosomy, big-bodied quaffs with considerable alcohol
and only modest acidity. They are galaxies away from the Mosel wines in spirit and style.
   The leading grape in Baden is Müller-Thurgau, which makes wines for everyday
drinking. You’ll also find grauburgunder (pinot gris), gutedel (chasselas), silvaner,
weissburgunder (pinot blanc), gewürztraminer, spätburgunder (pinot noir), and of course,
riesling. (Very little of the latter is grown.)
   The largest number of Baden wines are made by cooperatives (four out of every five
growers sell their grapes to co-ops). The leading co-op is Badischer Winzerkeller. Even by
cooperative standards, it is mammoth, making more than one-third of all of Baden’s wine.
   Baden is more famous for its food than for its wine. The forests of Baden abound with
game, berries, and wild mushrooms. In particular, venison, country bacon, and ham from
the Black Forest are legendary, as are preiselbeeren (a kind of small, sweet-tart cranberry)
and heidelbeeren (huckleberries). Many Baden dishes combine kirsch, cream, and tart
cherries, including, of course, the sine qua non of Baden cooking: Black Forest chocolate
cake.
   Among the top producers of Baden wine are Dr. Heger, Salwey, and Bercher.
The wide valley floor in Franken, on the northern edge of Bavaria. Wines here are sturdy, broad, and extremely crisp.
                                     FRANKEN

Just about due east of Rheingau, beyond the city of Frankfurt, is the W-shaped wine region
known as Franken. Here, at the northern edge of Bavaria, the climate is severe, springtime
frosts are common, and the size of the harvest fluctuates widely according to the weather.
    By law, only Franken wine is bottled in a squat, plump flagon called a bocksbeutel
(literally, a “goat scrotum”). Franken wines are broad, sharp, and sturdy, with little of the
elegance, transparency, or brilliant fruit of those of the Rhineland or Mosel. Nonetheless,
they are well loved by the Bavarians, who consume most of them. The top wines in
Franken are usually made from silvaner; little riesling is planted there. Common, everyday
wines tend to be made (often by cooperatives) from Müller-Thurgau or other crosses such
as Scheurebe, bacchus, kerner, or rieslaner. Most are made in a very dry style.
Trockenbeerenauslesen and beerenauslesen are very rare.
  Among the best Franken producers are Staatlicher Hofkeller, Bürgerspital, Hans
Wirsching, and Juliusspital.
                           FOR ALL THE RIGHT RIESLINGS
The high acid in German rieslings, coupled with their clean, pure flavors and the absence of obfuscating
oak, makes this the most exciting and versatile white wine when it comes to pairing with food. And—
unusually for a white wine—the range of possibilities begins with meat. In Germany, riesling is drunk with
every dish imaginable, from grilled sausages to pork roast. Talk about brilliant combinations!
   The wine’s penetrating, rapier-like acidity is a dramatic counterpoint to the fat in meat. But riesling is
also stunning with salads and simple vegetable dishes. Here, its light body and overall fresh character
work to echo the light, fresh flavors of the food. The most inspired pairing of all, however, is that of
riesling with complex Asian dishes, where soy sauce, garlic, and other bold and pungent seasonings
create vivid contrasting flavors, often within the same dish. Many wines simply shut down in such
company. But not riesling.
                                 MITTELRHEIN

The vineyards of Mittelrhein (“middle Rhine”) lie, technically speaking, both north and
south of where the Mosel flows into the Rhine. On the northern end, the region stretches
almost to Bonn. But virtually all of the important vineyards are located along the southern
stretch, from Koblenz to Bingen. At Bingen, where the Rhine makes an abrupt turn,
Mittelrhein ends and Rheingau begins. Mittelrhein is a wine region right out of Hansel and
Gretel. Fairytale medieval castles are poised above the steep vineyards; there are
numerous quaint villages, such as Bacharach and Boppard; the half-timbered houses are
postcard perfect. (The opera Hänsel und Gretel, based on the Grimm fairy tale, was
actually composed in Boppard by Engelbert Humperdinck.)
   Many Mittelrhein estates make wines geared to the tourist business. These simple,
inexpensive quaffs (mostly based on Müller-Thurgau) are happily drunk up in the region’s
bustling restaurants and cafés. There are, however, a handful of top estates that make
extremely good riesling and sekt. The best of these have a minerality and clarity
reminiscent of the Mosel wines. This is not by chance. Like the Mosel’s, the Mittelrhein’s
vineyards hover over the river on slate slopes that seem to soar skyward.
   There are problems here. The vineyards, sadly, are diminishing in number and have
been doing so for decades. The terrain is difficult to work, and for a variety of complex
reasons, most Mittelrhein wines have never been able to command high enough prices to
justify the cost of caring for and working the vineyards and making good wine. Any
vineyard that is not absolutely stellar is eventually abandoned for lack of profit. (And it
may never be used as a vineyard again. By EU law, if a vineyard has been abandoned for
several years, it must revert to nature and can no longer be used for any commercial
purpose.)
    All this said, the top wine estates produce some very good wines. In particular, the
rieslings that Jochen Ratzenberger makes are almost scary, they can be so intense,
minerally, and majestic. Adolf Weingart’s rieslings could blind you with their brilliant
clarity. And for pure, uncomplicated scrumptiousness, the rieslings of Toni Jost are
irresistible.
                                         NAHE

The Nahe River, south of and parallel to the Mosel, flows into the Rhine near Bingen,
close to where the Rheingau region ends. The region named after the Nahe is fairly large,
but the top estates here make stunning wines, completely on par with the best of the
Mosel. The rieslings in particular can be exceptionally complex, with beautiful arcs of
stone-fruit flavors, as if peaches and apricots were riding atop a cresting wave of acidity.
Nahe wines have an essential vividness and gracefulness; they can be exquisitely intense
and nearly explosive—all at the same time. Theirs is a fiery and filigreed elegance, as one
sip of a great spätlese from Dönnhoff, Hexamer, or Schlossgut Diel will attest. (The
ravishing Dönnhoff rieslings have flavors so intricate and dense that they seem, like a
Japanese sword, to be the fusion of hammered layers folded back into themselves.)




   Of all of the Nahe’s fine producers, I’d put the three just mentioned in a super-category
of their own, based on their excellence. But just a step lower are many other fantastic
producers, including Dr. Crusius, Hehner-Kiltz, Kruger-Rumpf, Schäfer-Fröhlich, Emrich-
Schönleber, and Jakob Schneider. And for good though not great wine, there’s also the
Nahe State Domaine, a state-owned enterprise created in the early part of the twentieth
century and called in German—get ready—Staatliche Weinbaudomäne Niederhausen-
Schlossböckelheim. (OK, go for it: Say it three times, fast.)
In spring, dandelions bloom in the vineyards above Nierstein in the Rheinhessen.
                                 RHEINHESSEN

Germany’s largest wine area, Rheinhessen, spreads out over 65,000 acres (26,300
hectares) south of Rheingau. Most of it is rather flat, fertile farmland, good for asparagus,
orchards, corn, and sugar beets. As for wine, everything depends on precisely where you
are. Most parts of the region make wine that is merely okay, much of which is
Liebfraumilch, a mild, inexpensive, generic wine (see page 559). Also produced—mostly
by cooperatives—are buckets of bargain, bland, sweetish wines destined for European
supermarkets. But there are delicious exceptions. The Scheurebe spätlesen from Ch. W.
Bernhard, made near the village of Hackenheim, are exotic masterpieces. And the rieslings
can be fantastic—especially from vineyards in one concentrated area, from Bodenheim to
Mettenheim, along the steep west bank of the Rhine. Known as the Rheinterrasse (Rhine
terrace), this brief stretch includes the well-known wine villages of Nackenheim,
Oppenheim, and Nierstein. The soil here is unlike any in Germany—a reddish sandstone
mixed with slate. The rieslings that come from this soil are earthy and juicy, with the kind
of up-front fruit that catapults out of the glass. There are a handful of top producers,
including Gunderloch, Keller, J. & H. A. Strub, Wagner Stempel, Wittmann, and Freiherr
Heyl zu Herrnsheim.
                                                                       AUSTRIA

             LOWER AUSTRIA | BURGENLAND | STYRIA | VIENNA
AUSTRIA RANKS THIRTEENTH AMONG WINE PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE
AUSTRIANS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 8 GALLONS (30 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Austria makes some of the raciest, most exciting wines in Europe. To taste them is to be
easily convinced. These are wines—whites in particular—with an absolutely uncanny
synergy (and energy) between power and elegance. Most of them are thoroughly dry, but
Austria is also known for luscious sweet wines intended to accompany (or be) dessert.
   Austrian viticulture is quite old. The Celts, discoverers of what would eventually
become many of the top wine regions of central Europe, planted the first grapes here in the
fourth century B.C. Later, the vineyards fell within the vast arc of the Roman Empire. By
the Middle Ages, Austrian vineyards, like those of France, Germany, and Italy, were in the
painstaking care of monks. But more than any other historical period, the twentieth
century—and its tumultuous politics—shaped Austrian wine.
   The modern country called Austria, about the size of Maine, dates from 1919, when the
sprawling Austro-Hungarian Empire was dissolved by the Treaty of Saint-Germain. In its
place, the post–World War I countries of Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Yugoslavia, and (a far
smaller) Austria were formed.
   The new Austria, economically unstable and enfeebled by war, could no longer afford
to make the sort of handcrafted wines that were a hallmark of the empire past. Something
serviceable and cheap was the order of the day. Austrian wine merchants began the mass
manufacture of rather insipid, slightly sweet, cheap quaffs that sufficed locally, satisfied
tourists, and could be exported easily to its main trading partner, Germany, which was also
financially strapped. The market for such wines, notwithstanding their lack of character,
grew. Austrian growers, paid peanuts for their grapes, increasingly planted the highest-
yielding, most innocuous varieties. Wine merchants and winemakers began taking every
production shortcut they could find.
                      WHAT’S FREUD GOT TO DO WITH IT?
 Austria is often wrongly assumed to be a sociocultural subset of Germany. Although they share more or
 less the same language, the two countries have national characters that are quite different. Austria,
 farther south and east than Germany, was often along the trade route taken by early travelers between
 Europe and Asia. As such, Austria has been influenced by both Western and Eastern thinking,
 philosophy, and art. The combination has given rise to a complex culture and national spirit. Austrians
 can seem more passionate, wilder, more spontaneous, and more melancholy than Germans. Austria is,
 after all, the homeland of both Sigmund Freud and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
    For their part, Austrian wines bear very little resemblance in flavor to German wines. Austria’s dry
 whites are much fuller in body and bolder in character than Germany’s filigreed, dry whites. The same is
 true with red wines. Austrian reds—juicy, lip-smacking, and often streaked with pepper and spice flavors
 —have almost nothing in common with the gentle, light-bodied reds of Germany.
    That said, Austria and Germany do share a few things. Both countries are known for handcrafting
 some of the most decadent, small-production sweet wines in Europe, from mesmerizing eisweins to
 ethereal trockenbeerenauslesen. And finally, both countries make delicious sekt, sparkling wine that is
 happily popped open at the slightest provocation.

   Then, in 1985, the downward spiral hit bottom. A small group of corrupt wine brokers
doctored a batch of cheap wine with diethylene glycol (a component of antifreeze) to
make it taste fuller and sweeter. Although the merchants were quickly caught and no one’s
health was compromised by the tainted wine, the news spread around the world.
   In the end, the wine scandal proved to be what one winemaker called a cleansing
thunderstorm. The mass market for inferior wine collapsed, leaving the few remaining
quality producers—mostly small family estates—to build a new Austrian wine industry
from the ground up. The turnaround has been dramatic. For the impassioned,
knowledgeable winemakers of today’s Austria, top-quality wine is a virtual religion, and
respect for the land is paramount. (It’s interesting to note that Austria has the largest
percentage of land under certified organic production of any country in the European
Union.) For an explanation of Austrian wine law, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page
926.
     THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Austria, a landlocked country, is bordered by the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic,
Germany, Hungary, Slovenia, Italy, and Switzerland. Although the western part of the
country, with its cities such as Salzburg and Innsbruck, is well known, the vineyards are
all in the distant, more exotic eastern half. There, like a backward C, some 108,000 acres
(43,700 hectares) of vineyards form a crescent along the country’s eastern border. Just
over 20,000 growers grow grapes here, and approximately 6,500 wineries make and bottle
wine.




The rocky, terraced vineyards of F. X. Pichler in the Wachau. The Pichler family makes some of Austria’s most stunning
         rieslings and grüner veltliners. Vines have been planted on these stark slopes since the 13th century.

   There are four main wine regions, the two largest of which have several smaller regions
within them. The two largest regions are Lower Austria and Burgenland; Styria and
Vienna are the two smaller ones.
   Lower Austria, the most important wine region in terms of size and reputation for high-
quality wine, is in the north, along the Slovakian border, and includes the top subregion
known as the Wachau. (The word lower in the name Lower Austria refers to the lower part
of the Danube River, which flows through the region.) Burgenland is the easternmost
Austrian wine region; much of it lies along the Hungarian border. Styria, the hilliest
region, is in the south, along the Slovenian border. And Vienna is the only major city in
the world that is considered a wine region.
                           THE QUICK SIP ON AUSTRIA
         AUSTRIA MAKES some of the most purely riveting wines in Europe.
         AUSTRIA IS DEVOTED primarily to dry white wines and magnificent sweet wines,
         although a surprising amount of delicious, food-friendly red wine is made.
         THE BEST WHITE WINES of Austria are based either on the snappy, peppery grape
         grüner veltliner or on riesling; the best reds are Zweigelt and blaufränkisch.

   Austria is mostly a white-wine producer; 60 percent of all its wine is white, although
absolutely delicious reds are made (more on which in a moment). In total, some thirty-five
grape varieties are planted. Grüner veltliner—still relatively unknown but capable of great
quality—is the leading white grape in terms of wine production. That said, many Austrian
wine experts consider riesling to be the country’s greatest grape, albeit one that is far less
planted. Austria can also excel with sauvignon blanc and pinot blanc, and the wonderfully
expressive reds Zweigelt and blaufränkisch should not be missed by any wine lover. For
the most part, all of the grapes I’ve just named stand alone in a wine; they are rarely
blended.
                                THE GRAPES OF AUSTRIA
                                                WHITES
 FURMINT: A minor grape, but a common component in ausbruch, the famous sweet wine of Burgenland.
 GRÜNER VELTLINER: Austria’s most important grape in terms of both quality and the acreage devoted
 to it. The wines’ unique flavor often begins with stone fruits and ends with a rush of white pepper.
 MORILLON OR CHARDONNAY: Chardonnay is called by both names in Austria. A minor grape; the
 best dry wines from it are elegant, almost taut in style. It is also made into some good sweet wines.
 MUSKATELLER: Locally also known as gelber muskateller, this is the same as muscat blanc à petits
 grains. Grown mainly in Styria, muskateller is extremely fragrant and lush.
 NEUBURGER: Very simple workhorse grape; a source of pedestrian dry wine and some good sweet
 wines.
 RIESLING: A major grape even though it is not widely planted in Austria. It is the source of lively, vibrant,
 often stunning wines, generally with more power than German rieslings.
 SÄMLING: Minor grape; a cross between riesling and an unknown grape. Sometimes used for eiswein.
 Known in Germany as Scheurebe.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: Not widely planted except in the region of Styria, but important because of the
 quality of the exotically smoky and grassy wines made from it.
 TRAMINER: Also known as savagnin. The aromatic ancestor of gewürztraminer; made into dry and
 sweet wines.
 WEISSBURGUNDER: Major grape; known elsewhere as pinot blanc. Makes well-focused, dry wines that
 range from creamy to racy. In Burgenland, sweet wines are also made from the grape.
 WELSCHRIESLING: Major grape; it is not a type of riesling, despite its name, but another name for the
 Croatian grape graševina. It makes simple, straightforward dry wines, sometimes with the aroma of fresh
 hay. In Burgenland, also used for late-harvest, botrytized wines.

                                                  REDS
 BLAUBURGUNDER: Known elsewhere as pinot noir. Widely variable in quality; at best it produces light
 wines with raspberry overtones.
 BLAUFRÄNKISCH: Major grape. Known in Germany, British Columbia, and Washington State by its
 other name—Lemberger. The source of bold, spicy, complex wines, often with commanding structures.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: From great vineyards and winemakers it can make surprisingly rich,
 structured wines with good balance and deep flavors.
 ST. LAURENT: Produces simple, hearty, and fruity wines.
 ZWEIGELT: A cross between blaufränkisch and St. Laurent. Its wines are reminiscent of California’s
 zinfandel; inky, fruity, with a briary edge.

   The Austrian philosophy of winemaking closely parallels that of top producers in
Germany and Alsace—namely, that greatness resides in purity. Austrian winemakers are
after the clearest possible expression of a given place and of a given grape’s inherent
flavors. Techniques that superimpose flavor (such as the barrel fermentation of white
wines) are used infrequently and cautiously. For all their sophistication, Austrian wine-
makers have a firm respect for tradition and accumulated knowledge. Many of the
extraordinary sweet wines, for example, are painstakingly made according to practices
established hundreds of years ago.
                  THE MOST IMPORTANT AUSTRIAN WINES
                                           LEADING WINES
         GRÜNER VELTLINER white (dry and sweet)
         RIESLING white (dry and sweet)
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white
         WEISSBURGUNDER white (dry and sweet)
         WELSCHRIESLING white (dry and sweet)
         BLAUFRÄNKISCH red
         ST. LAURENT red
         ZWEIGELT red

                                           WINES OF NOTE
         GELBER MUSKATELLER white
         TRAMINER white (dry and sweet)




      The rolling vineyards of Burgenland are where most of the world’s best blaufränkisch grapes are grown.

    These dessert wines notwithstanding, virtually all Austrian wines are bone dry.
Technically and legally speaking, off-dry, half-dry, or semisweet wines could be made, but
in reality, they aren’t. Most Austrian winemakers are adamant about dryness. Of course,
given the high acidity of most Austrian wines, dryness itself comes across in different
ways that influence our perceptions of flavor. As the Austrian wine specialist Terry Theise
points out, “[with Austrian wines] . . . there is soft creamy dry and there’s accommodating
dry and there’s very crisp dry and there’s fierce austere dry and there’s even this-could-
use-some-damn-sugar dry.”
   A few further words on the leading grape varieties themselves. As it does in Germany
and Alsace, riesling thrives here, although it accounts for just 4 percent of vineyard
plantings. Minerally, dramatic, and sheer, Austrian rieslings are unmasked. They show
little fruit in the conventional sense. They are sophisticated, delicious sheets of glass.
   Distinctive and vivid, grüner veltliner has not yet gotten the attention it deserves. For
me, the flavors of grüner veltliner include a faint echo of something green, wonderful
exotic fruit, splashes of minerals, and a dramatic burst of white pepperiness. It is “cool,” in
the cucumber sense of having cool, refreshing flavors. It is also an ancient grape—
according to DNA typing, it is a natural cross of savagnin and the nearly extinct German
variety St. Georgener. Going back even further in the family tree, grüner veltliner is
related to pinot noir (possibly as a grandchild), since pinot noir and savagnin are related.
                                     THE ID OF COFFEE
 Unlike cafés anywhere in the world, from Rome to Seattle, the Viennese coffeehouse is only tangentially
 about drinking coffee. Here, in the city where psychoanalysis was born, a coffeehouse is home to a
 complex ritual—more intimate than social, supremely private even within the public domain.
    Traditionally, coffeehouses were more or less demarcated by profession or social ranking. There were
 coffeehouses for politicians, coffeehouses for artists, coffeehouses for scholars, and so on. Every person
 had a single place to which he or she went exclusively. At a minimum, you spent an hour at a
 coffeehouse (no quickly-downed espressos), but more commonly, you would spend several hours and
 possibly the entire day there. Coffee would be ordered by color—gold, light gold, blond, dark gold—
 according to the amount of milk added, and would be served on a small tray with a few sugar cubes and
 a glass of water. The main activity was, and still is, reading newspapers provided by the house, although
 you could also write or work in complete solitude, using the café table as a private desk. Since the
 waiters knew every customer and his or her preferred coffee, you never really had to utter a single word.
 When people did go to the coffeehouse in pairs, it was either to read in mutual silence or to discuss
 problems or personal intimacies. Still, private conversation, not social banter, was the custom.
    Modern life has changed Viennese coffeehouses, but not by much. During the daytime, a respectful
 solemnity still prevails. People just sit, think, read, and sip coffee. At night, coffeehouses become
 somewhat more animated, serving goulash and then coffee and strudel to opera-and theatergoers.
    In the late fall and winter, coffee can become more substantial, including a particularly fortifying
 rendition called a fiaker. Made with liberal amounts of rum and whipped cream, fiakers are named after
 the open horse-drawn carriages that once transported people through the streets of Vienna. Riding in a
 fiaker on a cold Austrian night made you want to stop and sip a fiaker.
   Among Vienna’s best coffeehouses: Café Hawelka, Café Landtmann, Café Sacher, Café Sperl, Demel
 Konditorei, and Heiner Konditorei.

   If grüner veltliner is Austria’s signature gift to the world of white wine, then
blaufränkisch is its red gift. Undoubtedly noble in origin and very old (though its
parentage isn’t completely clear), blaufränkisch combines the words blau, meaning
“blue;” and fränkisch, an old German designation for “a fine wine.” Austrian
blaufränkisch is precise and sleek—spicy, herbal, and floral—and all of this plus the
flavors of delicious woodland berries and a sense of forestiness. Most of all, blaufränkisch
has grip and bite. It is exactly what one so often wants in order to splice through the
meatiness of meat. Despite its appeal, blaufränkisch is not the leading red grape of
Austria. That would be Zweigelt. A cross of blaufränkisch and a usually more simple
grape called St. Laurent, zweigelt makes a juicy, fruity, easy wine.
                                WHAT RIEDEL WROUGHT
    If you’re over 45 years old, you remember a time when wineglasses were just wineglasses. They were
 fairly small and sturdy and you didn’t care if you broke one because they were cheap. (The good glasses
 —the Waterford crystal ones—were safely ensconced, still in their original boxes, up in the attic, where
 they’d been since your wedding day when you got them.) Then came the 1990s and a new word entered
 the wine vernacular—Riedel. Georg Riedel, the tenth-generation head of his family’s Austrian crystal
 company, was a wine connoisseur. A man of strict and impeccable standards, Riedel had begun
 designing crystal wine glasses that would enhance the aromas and flavors of various varietals and types
 of wine. He soon became famous for his “Riedel Glass Tasting,” in which the same wine was tasted in
 various glasses, and consumers and wine pros around the world were invited to judge the results.
 Winemakers and restaurateurs were especially convinced of the efficacy of Riedel glasses, and within a
 few years, no top winery or restaurant was without them. Riedel’s success caused dozens of other top
 Austrian (Zalto) and German (Eisch, Schott Zwiesel) crystal companies to come out with competing lines
 of high-quality wineglasses. Today, no self-respecting wine lover thinks twice about having a cabinet full
 of good wineglasses and using them daily.

    Finally, Austria’s top wine districts possess infertile, eroded, well-drained soils. Sand,
gravel, slate, and loam are common, as are loess (fine sediment caused by wind-blown
silt) and gneiss (foliated metamorphic rock with coarse mineral grains arranged in bands).
       SWEETNESS AND RIPENESS: THE AUSTRIAN
                   HIERARCHY

One of the obvious ways in which Austrian wine is different from German is its
designations of ripeness. In Germany it’s still common for some fine wines to be made at a
variety of ripeness levels, starting with kabinett and spätlese and going up to BA and
TBA. A very similar hierarchy of ripeness used to be used in Austria as well. No longer.
Austrian fine wine producers all make dry wines from ripe grapes, end of story. The one
exception where you will find designations of ripeness is sweet wine (that is, dessert
wine). Here they are:
BEERENAUSLESE (BA):        must be made from overripe and/or botrytized grapes
EISWEIN:   must be made from overripe grapes naturally frozen on the vine
AUSBRUCH:   this category, unique to Austria, applies to wines that must be made
exclusively from botrytized and/or naturally dried grapes
TROCKENBEERENAUSLESE (TBA):    produced only in exceptional years and must be made
from predominatly botrytized grape bunches and extremely dried, raisinlike grape berries
   To be called by any of the names above, a wine must reach a certain ripeness level
measured in Austria by what is known as KMW, or the Klosterneuburger Mostwage scale.
The KMW compares the specific gravity of the must (based on its sugar content) to the
specific gravity of water. Austrian sweet wines make up just 1.8 percent of high-quality
wine production in Austria.

                               AUSTRIA’S CULINARY ICON
           Pumpkinseed oil is to Austria what olive oil is to Italy—a culinary and cultural icon.
           Pumpkinseed oil comes from the seeds of a small, green-and-yellow striped pumpkin
           grown mainly in the southern Austrian province of Styria. The prized seeds are
           removed and washed by hand, then roasted, mashed, and pressed. (Far less valued,
           the pumpkin flesh becomes livestock feed.) Deep emerald green, the oil has an
           unctuous texture and an almost hauntingly intense, nutty flavor. Austrians drizzle it over
           lettuces, vegetables, and breads and pour small puddles into soups including, of
           course, pumpkin soup. Thanks to its high vitamin content and unsaturated fatty acids,
           pumpkinseed oil is considered very healthful. It’s also quite expensive, and many of the
           best pumpkinseed oils are made by winegrowers.

   In particular, Austrian sweet wines are a specialty of Burgenland, which is slightly
warmer and more humid than the other regions (the better for botrytis to develop). But
there may be something cultural at work, too, for Burgenland is nudged up against
Hungary, which is known for one of the most sensational dessert wines in existence—
Tokaji Aszú.
                                              THE DAC

Ready for some controversy? In recent history, consumers of Austrian wine purchased it
based on the grape variety and the place. If you were in the mood for a pristine, dry
riesling and you knew the Wachau as one of the best places in the world for riesling, you
were all set. It was pretty simple. But as of the 1990s, Austria sought to align itself more
closely with many parts of western Europe and introduce an appellation system (like
France’s) that encourages wines to be chosen based on the place where the grapes grew.
(You, the wine drinker, would simply have to memorize the permissible grape varieties in
that place, as for example, French Côte-Rôtie = syrah). Some have argued that Austria has
taken a step backward by adopting an appellation system that restricts creativity among
winemakers and forces memorization among wine consumers. Others have argued that an
appellation system is the “grown-up” approach to wine, since it underscores the message
of terroir.




   Winemaker Fred Loimer of Weingut Loimer, in his biodynamic vineyards in the renowned Langenlois area of the
          Kamptal. Loimer makes some of Austria’s most ravishing and concentrated grüner veltliners.

   In 2001, the Ministry of Agriculture adopted the latter thinking and instituted a new
system called DAC (Districtus Austriae Controllatus, or “protected Austrian declaration
of origin”). The first DAC was the Weinviertel, in Lower Austria (for grüner veltliner), in
2003. To date there are nine DACS, with more potentially to follow. For wines that use the
DAC system, the appellation and the letters DAC are listed on the label, but usually not
the grape variety. And therein lies the rub. When a DAC is known for just one variety,
you’re compelled to memorize which variety it is, but at least the situation is not
completely confusing. On the other hand, several DACs are known for multiple varieties,
causing nothing if not consumer angst. Here are the nine, followed in parentheses by the
grape that’s allowed to be in the bottle.
In Lower Austria
WEINVIERTEL DAC:    (grüner veltliner)
TRAISENTAL DAC:    (grüner veltliner or riesling)
KREMSTAL DAC:    (grüner veltliner or riesling)
KAMPTAL DAC:    (grüner veltliner or riesling)
In Vienna
WIENER GEMISCHTER SATZ DAC:     (At least three high-quality white wine grapes must be
used, the leading one of which cannot constitute more than 50 percent of the blend.
Among the twenty permissible grapes are grüner veltliner, riesling, pinot blanc, pinot gris,
chardonnay, neuberger, and gewürztraminer.)
In Burgenland
EISENBERG DAC:   (blaufränkisch)
MITTELBURGENLAND DAC:         (blaufränkisch)
NEUSIEDLERSEE DAC:     (Zweigelt or Zweigelt with other indigenous reds if the wine is
reserve)
LEITHABERG DAC:   (pinot blanc, chardonnay, neuburger, and grüner veltliner for white;
blaufränkisch blended with up to 15 percent St. Laurent, Zweigelt, or pinot noir for red)




                   Grüner veltliner grapes—the source of many of the best wines of Austria.
                       THE FOODS OF AUSTRIA

Austria’s culinary traditions, along with Hungary’s, are the most sophisticated and
compelling in central Europe. Essays could be written on the soups alone. The gem of that
genre is pumpkin soup. Every top restaurant, every great home cook, has a personalized
recipe, including decadent versions in which whipped cream is folded in and roasted
pumpkinseed oil is drizzled on top. But there are also extraordinary potato soups that
prove just how majestic that tuber can be. In wine country, one must also try a frothy
weinsuppe (“wine soup”), usually made with riesling or grüner veltliner, beef stock,
paprika, and cream.
                     HEURIGE: THE WINEMAKER AS COOK
 The best places in Austria in which to taste homestyle food, drink local wines, and immerse yourself in
 everyday Austrian life are not cafés or restaurants. They are heurigen (HOY-rig-en)—rustic eating and
 drinking rooms (it would be erroneous to call them dining rooms), which are often attached to
 winemakers’ homes. Heurigen date from 1784, when a royal decree allowed every Austrian to “serve and
 sell their own produce including wine.”
    Traditionally, all of the food at a heurige, including the breads, soups, salads, strudels, and even the
 sausages, is made from scratch by the winemaker and his family. Similarly, the wine offered must be only
 the winemaker’s. The word heurige, in fact, refers both to the wine of the latest vintage and the place
 where it’s drunk. In other words, you drink heurige at a heurige. By law, a winemaker may only keep his
 heurige open for business as long as his supply of heurige lasts.
    Most heurigen are utterly modest gathering spots, with communal tables and often a small playground
 for the children of their patrons. People go as much to socialize as to eat or drink. Although wine is
 available by the bottle, lots of it is ordered and drunk by the glass, or is made into a spritzer and served in
 a mug. (Interestingly, no coffee or beer is allowed to be sold.) In the countryside outside Vienna, heurigen
 are often called buschenschenken, named after the swags of fir branches tied to the doors.

   Strudels are ubiquitous in Austria, as often savory (made with wild mushrooms, root
vegetables, ham, shellfish, herbs, cheese, and so on) as sweet (made with apples, plums,
nuts, cherries, apricots). Strudel dough, similar to phyllo dough, is rolled into ultra-thin
sheets and brushed lightly with butter before it is filled and rolled up. At the Heurige
Schandl, in the village of Rust, in the wine region of Burgenland, the juicy baked red
cabbage and caraway strudel comes with a pool of dill and sour cream sauce. (Peter
Schandl, the owner, is also a winemaker, who makes an irresistible pinot blanc.) Strudel is
a venue for offal as well. Austrians are quite fond of wrapping the thin dough around lamb
and veal tongues, hearts, sweetbreads, and brains.




   The breads in Austria, like those in Germany, make bread in western Europe seem
about as nutritious as Styrofoam. Austrian breads are usually multigrain and often include
herbs, spices, and nuts; you’ll find roasted onion and walnut bread, pumpkinseed bread,
and anise and black pepper bread. The best bread I have ever had—anywhere in the world
—is made by the Austrian baker Hubert Auer in the city of Graz, in Styria. The Auer
breads are often made with ancient types of grain, custom cultivated for the company. The
breads are available in Auer’s shops in Graz as well as in Vienna.
  When Austrians themselves are asked to name the quintessential Austrian dish, a
majority answer Wiener schnitzel, pounded veal medallions that are coated in coarse
whole-grain bread crumbs—to make the schnitzel crunchy—then fried.




 Bread—in Austria, it’s plentiful and irresistible. Even in a simple stall in the Naschtmarkt—Vienna’s pulsing outdoor
                            market—sweet and savory breads can be found in abundance.

   The other well-loved meat specialties are venison, game birds, wild boar, all manner of
pork, and tafelspitz (boiled beef), which tastes much better than it sounds and is usually
served with apfelkren, fresh horseradish pureed with cooked apples, and roasted potatoes.
    Meat and potatoes. Bread and soup. If these do not seem the stuff of culinary dreams, it
is because we consider them common, too fundamental to be inspirational. But Austria’s
position as an Old World crossroads between East and West has meant that the cooking is
anything but plebeian. The exotic and the familiar have been intriguingly mingled here for
centuries. You can smell it. The aroma wafting out of any kitchen window is not just
vegetables or meat, but a mesmerizing collective scent of those plus ginger, paprika,
cumin, caraway, dill, garlic, poppy seed, nutmeg, cinnamon, and juniper.
   The Austro-Hungarian monarchy left numerous culinary remnants, including the two
most famous: dumplings (knödel) and goulash (gulasch). Dumplings can be made simply
from potato flour or from crumbled bread rolls. But more intriguing is the invention of
bread mixed with meat, herbs, and/or cheese or, for sweet dumplings, fruit, jam, and/or
sugar. Knödel are masterful and irresistible in Austria, and are often served with soup,
meats, or dessert. As for goulash, it is still traditional in Vienna for friends to go out for
this paprika-rich beef ragout after the opera or theater.
                     ABOUT THOSE “FRENCH” CROISSANTS
 For centuries, imperialistic Turkish tribes hoping to invade western Europe considered Austria a militarily
 strategic foot in the door. Austria usually managed to defend itself against these periodic sieges, but
 occasionally the Turks prevailed. A brief occupation in the late 1600s had two redeeming results—both
 culinary. Coffee beans were brought to Vienna, instigating a revolutionary change in Austrian drinking
 habits, and Viennese bakers created the croissant to commemorate the end of the Turkish siege. The
 rich dough’s shape was modeled after the crescent moon emblem on Turkish banners.




  Viennese desserts—both simple and elaborate—are culinary high art and an inspiration for pastry chefs around the
   world. Here, a traditional Gugelhupf cake, just waiting to be accompanied by a cup of rich, dark Viennese coffee.

   Another Austrian custom is wurst snacking. All over Vienna and other major cities,
small kiosks sell dozens of different grilled sausages served with hot or sweet mustard,
crisp pickles, and hot peppers.
    Save room. Austrian desserts are so good that Austrians often have them for breakfast
or with coffee at 10:00 A.M. or at 4:00 P.M. There are the classics: apfelstrudel (apple
strudel) and topfenstrudel (strudel made with sweetened fresh cheese and raisins and
served with a vanilla custard sauce), Linzertorte (a raspberry and nut torte named after the
city of Linz), Sachertorte (a dense chocolate torte, after which the Hotel Sacher in Vienna
is named), plus countless poppy seed puddings.
    In Vienna, the most sumptuous spot for dessert—indeed, one of the premier café/pastry
shops in the world—is Demel. It bakes some ninety-five types of cakes and tortes alone,
plus perfect strudels bursting with fruit, and dark chocolate desserts that beg you to order
them. These are all grandly showcased along antique wooden sideboards and will be
served to you by perfectly mannered Viennese waitresses. The accompaniment of choice
is rich Viennese coffee served with whipped cream. Demel is on the elegant shopping
street called (counterintuitively) Kohlmarkt—cabbage market—at number 14.
   As for actual cabbages, the place to see them is Vienna’s bustling outdoor market, the
Naschmarkt, with its purple figs the size of apples, its wooden barrels of fresh sauerkraut,
and the dizzying array of fragrant Turkish breads, olives, and cheeses. First-time visitors
can be taken aback by finding Austrian apfelstrudel and Turkish baklava sold side by side,
especially since the countries don’t actually border one another. But the Naschmarkt
clearly reflects the symbiosis that has existed for centuries (sometimes happily, most times
not) between the two historic rivals. Today, Turkish immigrants make up a large part of
the Austrian population, and their rich culinary traditions continue to be woven into the
Austrian gastronomic mainstream with delicious results. One of the most magnificent
examples: the croissant.
LOWER AUSTRIA

Lower Austria (known locally as Niederosterriech) is made up of eight separate wine
districts that loop in a grand arc around the city of Vienna. (Vienna is not included in these
districts; it’s a separate wine region of its own.) These are: the Wachau, Kremstal,
Kamptal, Traisental, Wagram, Weinviertel, Carnuntum, and Thermenregion. Lower
Austria is the most important wine region in Austria. More than 50 percent (67,000
acres/27,100 hectares) of Austria’s vineyards are located here. The region is not in the
south, as the name would seem to suggest, but rather is tucked into the northeastern corner
of the country, along the lower part of the Danube River.
    The Wachau (va-COW)—a UNESCO World Heritage site and the tiniest of the districts
(just 3,334 acres/1,349 hectares)—is the most important. The whites here are unmatched
in their sheer clarity of flavor, elegance, and balance (the vinous equivalent of perfect
pitch). Through the middle of the Wachau, the Danube flows slowly and silently. Over
millennia, it has gorged its way through granite gneiss (metamorphosed igneous rocks that
are folated into layers) rich with quartz and feldspar, grinding them into drifting silt (loess)
that settled on the east-facing terraces at the end of the last Ice Age. This is riesling and
grüner veltliner territory at its best and wine country at its most serene, with storybook
villages and country restaurants all along the riverbanks. The climate, tempered by the
river, is nonetheless cool, with strong variations in temperature between day and night.
Both the soil and the climate give good structure and acidity to the grapes.




 In the cool cellars of Austria’s best wineries, fermentation tanks are generally small, reflecting the fact that most top
                               wineries make different wines from different vineyard sites.
                     THE BLUE MONASTERY OF DÜRNSTEIN
    The medieval village of Dürnstein is one of the prettiest in the Wachau. Along cobblestone streets sit
    houses outlined in flower boxes. The village itself can be seen from quite far away, thanks to the
    strikingly beautiful blue spire of the monastery’s church, said to be the color of the Virgin Mary’s robe.

   The Wachau is the only place in all of Austria where you’ll find the three words
steinfeder, federspiel, and smaragd. These terms were created by the Vinea Wachau, an
association of the top Wachau producers, whose goal was to set their dry white wines
apart. The categories (which must be listed on the wine labels) are defined as follows:
STEINFEDER:   Natural unchaptalized wines with no more than 11.5 percent alcohol.
(Steinfeder is the name of a local strain of feathery grass, and the association poetically
describes these wines as “dainty.”)
FEDERSPIEL:  Natural unchaptalized wines with at least 11.5 but no more than 12.5 percent
alcohol. The name federspiel derives from the local sport of falconry.
SMARAGD:    The word smaragd (meaning “emerald”) is also the name of a bright green
lizard that suns itself in the vineyards here. Smaragd wines are the most physiologically
ripe and are therefore considered the best. The wines must have a minimum of 12.5
percent alcohol; most are higher.




                 The vineyards of Domaine Wachau in the Wachau region, along the Danube River.

   The other traditional white grapes in Lower Austria include welschriesling (not a
riesling, despite its name, but the Croatian grape graševina), weissburgunder (pinot blanc),
a small amount of chardonnay, and the slightly fat, somewhat neutral neuburger.
   Just below Vienna, in the Thermenregion (named for the many hot springs there), two
rare whites can be found: rotgipfler and zierfandler. Usually blended together to create the
specialty wine of the region, the two make a massively fruity and rather heavy white with
spicy orange overtones.
   Although red wine is not Lower Austria’s strong suit, there are some good ones,
including a number of simple, spicy spätburgunders (pinot noirs) and Zweigelts. One of
the most lip-smacking Zweigelts is that of Jamek, an excellent family-run winery,
restaurant, and inn right on the banks of the Danube near the Old World village of
Dürnstein (where, in 1192, the English king Richard the Lion-Hearted was imprisoned by
Leopold V, Duke of Austria).
            SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF GRÜNER VELTLINER
    Bründlmayer • Emmerich Knoll • Franz Hirtzberger • F. X. Pichler • Hiedler • Hirsch • Holzapfel • Leo
                        Alzinger • Loimer • Nigl • Prager • Schloss Gobelsburg
                  The Lower Austrian Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                           SCHLOSS GOBELSBURG

                               RIESLING | TRADITION | RESERVE | KAMPTAL
                                                   100% riesling
One of the top producers in the Kamptal region, Schloss Gobelsburg makes exquisitely intense, shockingly pure
rieslings and grüner veltliners. One of their rieslings—called Tradition—is a tightly wound molecule of energy
waiting to explode into minerals, stone fruits, and waves of amazing freshness on your palate. But of course, there’s
more—a fragile whiff of flowers and an echo of exotic citrus peel savoriness, rather like preserved lemons. The
wine comes from older vines on the slopes of the famous Gaisberg vineyard. Schloss Gobelsburg is the oldest
winery in the Danube region, with a documented history back to 1171. The schloss (castle) itself is owned by the
monks of the nearby Stift Zwettl monastery, and the winery is managed by the Moosbrugger family. “Tradition” is
the name Michael Moosbrugger gives to bottlings he makes that honor a time before technology, and indeed this
wine was made as it might have been at the turn of the twentieth century.
                                                      HIRSCH

                            GRÜNER VELTLINER | LAMM | RESERVE | KAMPTAL
                                                100% grüner veltliner
Hirsch makes almost Baroque-style grüner veltliners—wines with curves of softness, fleshy peachiness, and gentle
acidity that seem to lull you into a trance, until the end, when the wine hails with white pepper. I can think of a
dozen things I’d like to eat with them right this moment. This is a small, family estate exclusively devoted to
riesling and grüner veltliner, and this wine, from the famous Kamptal vineyard known as Lamm, is astonishing.




                                                 BRÜNDLMAYER

                            GRÜNER VELTLINER | LAMM | RESERVE | KAMPTAL
                                                100% grüner veltliner
Willi Bründlmayer typifies the quality-obsessed New Wave generation of Austrian winemakers now at the helm of
Austria’s best estates. His rieslings, with their bright, powerful aromas and crystal-clear flavors, are like climbing
into a lemon tree. But I love especially this grüner veltliner, from the same vineyard—Lamm—as the Hirsch. Once
again, the vineyard offers up a shiatsu massage of white pepper, but Bründlmayer’s wine also has a creamy core
around which that pepper, plus minerals, circle like bees around the honey-rich hive. A simply fantastic grüner
veltliner.
                                                       NIGL

                           GRÜNER VELTLINER | ALTE REBEN | LOWER AUSTRIA
                                                100% grüner veltliner
The four letters N, I, G, L stand alone on the bare, white front label. Absolutely no adornment. It’s as if everything
is stripped away and you are left with one final essential. That idea also describes the Nigl wines. Crystalline,
filigreed, precise, drenched in minerals, and possessing an atomic density of flavor, they are wines without an ounce
of baby fat. Every molecule is lined up along a single trajectory of profound flavor. I would drink any Nigl wine
anytime with pleasure, but I especially love this grüner veltliner from old vines (alte reben) for its operatic opener
(minerals dipped in peach syrup) and its flourishing finale (cymbals of thundering white pepper).




                                                     LOIMER

                   GRÜNER VELTLINER | LANGENLOIS SPIEGEL | RESERVE | KAMPTAL
                                                100% grüner veltliner
The Loimer family makes powerhouse grüner veltliners, racy wines with a sense of urgency to them. They are
always vivid, but best of all is their tension of opposites—they are salty and peppery, light and dense, minerally and
fruity, all at the same time. This wine is from the small Spiegel vineyard, near the town of Langenlois in the
Kamptal (Kamp Valley), where the Kamp River has carved deep gorges (now covered in loess) in the bedrock. The
Loimer family are ardent practitioners of biodynamics (see Biodynamic Viticulture, page 34).
                                               DOMÄNE WACHAU

                    GRÜNER VELTLINER | TERRASSEN | SMARAGD | LOWER AUSTRIA
                                                100% grüner veltliner
The massive wines of Domäne Wachau are known for their gravitas, and the sheer density and weight of this grüner
veltliner is an astounding example. I once wrote, “It’s like tasting howling sounds from the depths of the ocean; it
makes you feel as if the entire earth welled up and gently put preserved lemons, spices, and rocks in your mouth.”
Domäne Wachau is a cooperative (certainly one of the top cooperatives in the world) that makes wines from dozens
of small growers, who produce more than 30 percent of all the grapes in the Wachau. Terrassen (“terraces”) refers
to the fact that all of the grapes for this wine were grown on rocky, dry terraces where the elevation, orientation to
the sun, and attenuated soils all lead to high-quality grapes.

                                                       RED
                                           SCHLOSS GOBELSBURG

                               PINOT NOIR | ALTE HAIDE | LOWER AUSTRIA
                                                 100% pinot noir
Before I first tasted this wine, I would have said that Austrian and German pinot noir had a long way to go before
they’d be put in the same company with Burgundy. This wine opened my eyes. It’s as delicate, layered, precise, and
filigreed as pinot noir can be, with long ribbons of spiciness and earthiness and a core of rich raspberry/cranberry
fruit. The silky/creamy texture is sublime (for Burgundy lovers, it will seem like a page out of the Chambolle-
Musigny playbook). I am not surprised that this wine comes from Schloss Gobelsburg, one of the great wine estates
of the world, and an estate from which I’ve never had anything less than a stunning wine. As I noted in the
description of its riesling, the castle of Schloss Gobelsburg is owned by the Cistercian monks of the adjoining Stift
Zwettl monastery. It was these monks who brought pinot noir to the Langenlois region of Lower Austria from their
homeland, Burgundy. In old German, alte haide means “old heath,” a reference to land that was considered too dry
or stony to grow things, and thus was left fallow or used for sheep.
BURGENLAND

Austria’s second-largest wine region after Lower Austria, Burgenland (13,840 acres/5,600
hectares) huddles against Hungary on the far eastern border (Budapest is only some 130
miles/210 kilometers away). The vineyards here, along with those in Hungary, formed a
vast, uninterrupted sea of vines during the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. Burgenland is
known primarily for its opulent sweet wines, as well as some remarkable reds.
   Sweet wines have been the glory of this part of central Europe for eons. The most
celebrated type—ausbruch—is made mostly from grapes infected by Botrytis cinerea,
although some of the grapes can simply be dried and shriveled. For ausbruch, these grapes
are then mixed with freshly pressed must from grapes that are only partially botrytized.
(Reflecting Burgenland’s proximity to Hungary, this process is similar to the manner in
which Hungary’s famous sweet wine, Tokaji Aszú, is made; see page 632.) Both the fully
and partially botrytized grapes for ausbruch must come from the same vineyard. The
grapes are sometimes foot-trodden, and the wine is aged in casks. Ausbruch is more
baroque, outrageous, bruléed, and honeyed than beerenauslese, but has less residual sugar
and more alcohol than trockenbeerenauslese.
    The most famous ausbrüche, as well as BAs and TBAs, are made possible by a
hauntingly beautiful natural entity: an almost supernatural lake poised between northern
Burgenland and Hungary named Neusiedl (the Austrians call this the Neusiedlersee).
More than 186 square miles (482 square kilometers) in size, it is only 2 to 7 feet (0.6 to 2
meters) deep. The shallow lake gives up so much humidity that it is threatened by constant
evaporation. In fact, twice during the past century it dried up completely. Reeds and
grasses love the lake. So many of them grow around it that thatching material developed
into a local industry. Birds also love the lake. Indeed, the vast bird population has resulted
in the area becoming one of Europe’s largest wildlife preserves. And thanks to the
thousands of storks that nest and feed here, the lake has been called a stork smorgasbord.
But as much as the reeds or the birds, grapes love the lake. It’s where they love to rot.
 Silvia Heinrich, who now runs her family’s winery, J. Heinrich, in southern Burgenland. Her delicious blaufränkisch
                         tastes as if it’s poised halfway between the Old World and the New.

   The wet air and the gentle climate make for a perfect macro petri dish in which botrytis
can grow quickly, at the expense of other forms of rot and mold. Thus, the best
Burgenland ausbrüche, BAs, and TBAs have luscious purity to them, and the echo of
botrytis flavor is vivid. The tempting, sweet grapes do not go unnoticed by the birds, of
course. Every last grape would be eaten by them were it not for the fact that growers here
have set up programmed recordings of gun blasts that thunder through the tranquil
vineyards every few minutes, keeping the flocks away (and shattering any romantic
moment one might be having, communing with the vines).
   A number of different grape varieties are used for Burgenland’s sweet wines:
welschriesling, chardonnay, traminer, Scheurebe, and others, including occasionally the
principal grape used in Hungarian Tokaji Aszú, fur-mint. The vines are planted in
sandy/stony/chalky soil all around the shallow lake. The pools of warm lake water at the
edges of the vineyards are like natural humidifiers releasing their invisible mist, so critical
for botrytis. Pickers generally go into the vineyards three separate times, hand harvesting
only perfectly botrytized bunches each time.
   The eastern shore of the Neusiedlersee is said to produce a more bountiful, fleshy,
earthy style of sweet wine than the slightly more austere style of the hillier western shore.
On the western side, called Neusiedlersee-Hügelland, is the charming village of Rust
(pronounced roost), which along with Tokaj in Hungary, has been one of central Europe’s
most eminent wine towns since the Middle Ages. In 1681, Rust bought its political
independence and religious freedom by paying Leopold I, who, at the time, was the
reigning Holy Roman Emperor, King of Hungary, King of Croatia, King of Bohemia, and
Archduke of Austria, 60,000 gold guilders and 30,000 liters (7,900 gallons) of ausbruch.
   In years when botrytis doesn’t form as thoroughly, and thus when the production of
ausbruch, BA, and TBA is small, growers in Burgenland may make other types of sweet
wine—the rare strohwein (“straw wine”) from grapes dried on mats made from the reeds
of the lake; or, if the winter is especially cold, eiswein, the sweet outcome of grapes left on
the vine until frozen. The long hang-time—well into the dead of winter—concentrates the
grapes’ sugar and acid. In the best Austrian eisweins, voluptuous sweetness is wrapped
around an electrifying nucleus of acidity, making for an unparalleled taste sensation.
   Then there are the reds. Specializing in ornate, sweet white wines and complex, dry
reds may seem counterintuitive at first (until one considers Bordeaux). In any case, many
Burgenland winemakers do both quite successfully.
   As you move further south in Burgenland, away from Lake Neusiedl and toward
Mittelburgenland (Middle Burgenland) and Südburgenland (South Burgenland), red wines
take on greater prominence. Decent red wine has a long-established foundation here;
superb red wine is a far more recent phenomenon. But already, Mittelburgenland is a DAC
for blaufränkisch, as is the DAC Eisenberg within Südburgenland. In the latter, you find
iron-rich schist soils, and the blaufränkisch that is grown in them has a distinct minerally
spiciness all its own.
    The foremost red grape is indeed blaufränkisch, and when it is good, it can become a
daring wine—bold, dark in color, suffused with the unusual flavor of raspberries,
blueberries, and sour cherries dusted with white pepper and minerals. The wine is usually
structured and sleek, yet it has crushed-velvet softness and juiciness—imagine good
cabernet franc crossed with good syrah crossed with malbec. In other words, blaufränkisch
is the complete opposite of northern European red wines. Lastly, as red wine plantings
have shot through the roof in recent years, so has the collective wisdom making the wines.
Extremely delicious, Austrian blaufränkisch deserves (and well may get) much more
serious attention from the world in years to come.
   The two other well-loved local red grapes are Zweigelt and St. Laurent. Zweigelt, a
cross between blaufränkisch and St. Laurent, is grapey, full of black cherry flavors, and
uncomplicated. St. Laurent is usually also straightforward and satisfying—a combination
of earth, mushrooms, and spices, not unlike a simple pinot noir.
   In Burgenland, some winemakers also make dry whites, including chardonnay. The
best are elegant, made entirely without wood, and brimming with creamy flavors balanced
by just the right flash of acidity. Look for the producers Velich and Paul Achs.
  The ancient city of Rust in Burgenland on the western shore of Lake Neusiedl is celebrated for its ausbrüche.

            SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF BLAUFRÄNKISCH
Ernst Triebaumer • Gesellmann • Hans Iby • Hans Igler • Hans Nittnaus • Krutzler • Prieler • Umathum •
                                             Wallner
                       The Burgenland Wines to Know
                                                    WHITE




                                                    UMATHUM

                               GELBER & ROTER TRAMINER | BURGENLAND
                            Approximately 60% roter traminer, 30% gelber traminer
This fantastic and unusual wine is made from the rare yellow (gelber) traminer and red (roter) traminer, both of
which are versions of the grape savagnin. Beautifully aromatic, the wine has what can only be described as dazzling
citrus bitterness—as if the skins of perfect grapefruits, limes, kumquats, and oranges were transmuted into wine.
The effect is at once cool, sophisticated, refreshing, and begging for Southeast Asian appetizers. Umathum, which
also makes one of the most fantastic rosés in Europe, is most widely known for its red wines, which are aged in
bottle for three years before being released. The Umathum family has been growing grapes in Burgenland since the
end of the eighteenth century, and began making their own wine in the 1980s.

                                                      REDS




                                                     SATTLER

                                  ST. LAURENT | RESERVE | BURGENLAND
                                                 100% St. Laurent
St. Laurent is something of a mystery. Not as complex or distinctive as blaufränkisch, it’s nonetheless a wine that,
when it’s good, is hugely satisfying. The kind of wine with a serious “yum” factor. Before you know it, you’re on
your third glass. Sattler, a small family winery that specializes in St. Laurent and Zweigelt, makes an explosively
spicy, richly fruited, satiny textured reserve St. Laurent. It always reminds me of some wondrous vinous rendition
of cranberries and Christmas spices. It’s absolutely delicious with duck, turkey, and roast chicken.
                                                    J. HEINRICH

                               BLAUFRÄNKISCH | GOLDBERG | BURGENLAND
                                                  100% blaufränkisch
The loamy Goldberg vineyard is one of the oldest sites in southern Burgenland, and the wine, based on sixty-year-
old vines, exudes a real purity of fresh fruit flavor. Great blaufränkisch like this tastes as if it’s poised half in the
Old World and half in the New World—on the one hand, there’s a delicious Campari-like bitterness, but on the
other, the core of the wine is vivid red cherry jam. This estate is run by the young Silvia Heinrich who, in 2002, left
her career in Vienna to come back to the three-hundred-year-old family winery and learn alongside her father, the
late Johann Heinrich.
                                                      PRIELER

                              BLAUFRÄNKISCH | LEITHABERG | BURGENLAND
                                                  100% blaufränkisch
Great blaufränkisch—and Prieler’s is one—has an element of the savage in it, a howling, wild, gamy, pepper-and-
salt character that you find in Northern Rhône syrahs. At the same time, the wine has a sleek structure and a blue-
fruit coolness that’s not unlike cabernet franc. Indeed, if someone told me blaufränkisch was a cross of syrah and
cabernet franc, I’d believe it. (It’s not.) Prieler’s blaufränkisch called Leithaberg is a serious, untamed, dramatic red
—tight, hard, and destined for a long life; as spicy as chai; as meaty as rare steak sitting in a pool of savory juices.
An absolutely phenomenal example of this stellar variety.
                                              SWEET WINES
                                               FEILER-ARTINGER

            JONATHAN | RUSTER AUSBRUCH | ESSENZ | NEUSIEDLERSEE-HÜGELLAND
                                      50% welschriesling, 50% chardonnay
Feiler-Artinger’s Ruster Ausbruch Essenz is a liquid caress, enveloping you and folding you into it. The wine quite
simply has awesome beauty. It’s unctuous, complex, and sweet but not saccharine. Dried fruits, nuts, and dried
citrus peel explode on the palate, and all the while a gentle acidity hums in the background. The sense of refinement
and exquisiteness (at just 6.5 percent alcohol) is crazy good. Feiler-Artinger is a family winery established in the
early 1900s. This wine is named Jonathan in honor of the birth of the current winemaker’s son. While all ausbruch
must be made from botrytized grapes and reach a KMW (using the Klosterneuberg Mostwage scale) of 27 degrees,
wines labeled Essenz are extremely concentrated and reach 35 degrees or more.




                                                HEIDI SCHRÖCK

   RUSTER AUSBRUCH | AUF DEN FLUGELN DER MORGENRÖTE | NEUSIEDLERSEE-HÜGELLAND
                                      66% welschriesling, 34% weissburgunder
As beautiful as its name, Auf den Flugeln der Morgenröte, which means “on the wings of red dawn.” Langorously
sweet but not syrupy, and evocative of quince, exotic oranges, marmalade, and spices, Heidi Schröck’s ausbrüche
are always utterly elegant and have the ability to put their drinkers in a happy, satisfied, Zenlike state. The woman
herself is a leading winemaker and innovator in Burgenland.
 In a country full of exquisitely beautiful wine regions, Styria, in the southeastern corner of Austria, has a particular,
pastoral charm. Sauvignon blanc is a specialty here as is artisanal pumpkinseed oil, Austria’s equivalent of extra virgin
                                                         olive oil.
STYRIA

Styria, along Austria’s mountainous, southern Alpine border, is the second smallest wine
region in the country, with just 10,472 acres (4,238 hectares) of grapes. Yet this is
arguably one of the world’s top spots for sauvignon blanc, as well as Austria’s most
beautiful wine region. Behind the small houses with their lace curtains and flower boxes,
the vineyards stretch over kelly-green hills. Many vineyards have a klapotez—a wooden
windmill with hammers that make a loud clacking noise to scare off the birds (who,
unfooled, sometimes sit right on top of the contraption).
   Everywhere in Styria there are pumpkin patches, for this is the home of Austria’s
famous specialty, pumpkinseed oil. Made from the roasted seeds of a special green-and-
yellow striped pumpkin, the dark green oil is mind-blowingly delicious (see page 598).
   As for Styrian wines, the best (almost all of them white because of the alpine climate)
can be dazzling, with bright, focused flavors that have a keen, kinetic edge to them. Most
of the top wines are found along the wine route (weinstrasse) in the hilly province of south
Styria, Südersteiermark, where the lemon-yellow daylight is so vivid it almost seems
polished. Vineyards here are among the steepest in the country, and the soils are varied—
from slate, marl, and limestone, to gneiss, schist, basalt, sand, and loam.
    Chardonnay (called morillon in Styria) has a long history here, the vines having been
brought from the Champagne region of France in the nineteenth century. For the most
part, Styrian chardonnay is made in the style of French Chablis—taut and linear rather
than fat and buttery. But the biggest surprise—and Austria’s best-kept secret—is Styrian
sauvignon blanc. These are racy, herbal, lemony wines, with a wild outdoorsy quality and
a tanginess not unlike a good French Sancerre. In addition to sauvignon blanc and
morillon, the varieties of note include welschriesling, weissburgunder, traminer, and
beautifully taut, dry, refreshing muskateller (aka gelber muskateller), the Austrian name
for muscat blanc à petits grains, the best of the extensive group of wines with muscat in
their names.
The Hannes brothers, who run the hotel and restaurant at Weingut Sattlerhof in Gamlitz in Styria, are known for making
                                                  excellent wines.
                                       EAU-DE-AUSTRIA
 In Austria, schnapps is said to be made from every fruit and berry you have heard of and every fruit and
 berry you haven’t. Schnapps, like eau-de-vie in France and grappa in Italy, is a clear, unaged distillate
 (about 40 proof) that is drunk after the meal. Often Austrian families proudly make their own schnapps
 from fruit they (also proudly) grow themselves, and it’s frequently a delicious, relatively mild sweet
 liqueur. In restaurants you’ll also find hundreds of handcrafted, limited-production, very expensive
 versions made by individual winemakers and artisanal distillers. Plum is the most common flavor, but
 more intriguing perhaps are schnapps made from elderberries, quince, juniper, apricots, cherries,
 blueberries, blackberries, and rowanberries from the mountain ash tree.

   Styria is also known for rosés—or rather, a single type of rosé called schilcher. Made
from the blauer wildbacher grape, which grows almost exclusively in west Styria,
schilcher is very high in acid. There is no better mate for the smoked, aged bacon that is
also a specialty of the region.
   Styrian wine estates tend to be very small but often have an adjoining restaurant,
buschenschenk, or small inn. One not to be missed is Sattlerhof, a wine estate in Gamlitz,
known for its extremely delicious sauvignon blanc and chardonnay and its adjoining
restaurant, also called Sattlerhof, considered one of the best restaurants in Styria.
The Vienna State Opera on the Ringstrasse. Vienna, a stately but vividly passionate city, is the only major city in the
                                        world that is also a wine region.
VIENNA

There is a vineyard of sorts in Paris. Someone in Rome must have a vine or two planted
next to the tomatoes. But Vienna is the only major city in the world that is a commercially
significant wine region unto itself. Within the city limits there are 1,512 acres (612
hectares) of grapes, all of which fall under a government protection program lest
developers be tempted to put such valuable real estate to more profitable uses.
    The name Vienna, or as it’s spelled in Austria, Wien (pronounced veen), would seem to
derive from wein (“wine”), but it does not. The word is of Celtic origin and means “white
or wild river,” a reference to the Danube. The city itself is romantic and exhilarating, the
kind of place that makes you want to abandon yourself to its beauty. As in Paris, the very
air seems to shimmer with the secrets of centuries past. Everywhere, stately buildings
glow in the white sunlight. There is an aura of mystery and passion. That this also happens
to be a wine region makes perfect sense to those for whom wine is mystery, beauty, and
romance.
    From the Middle Ages on, Viennese vineyards were planted to slake the thirst of the
local citizenry. Many plots were in the care of either monks or nobles, who studied
viticulture and built cellars, some of which are still in use. Vineyards were planted with
different varieties of both white and red grapes side by side in the same plot. The grapes
would be picked and pressed together as a field blend. This traditional style of wine, called
gemischter satz—“mixed planting”—makes up about a third of all Viennese wine today,
and as of 2013, the style has DAC status. Such wines are rarely very good, but they are
always fascinating. Just try to imagine the flavor of a wine made from riesling, pinot
blanc, neuburger, grüner veltliner, and gewürztraminer. Today, Vienna’s better vineyards,
of course, are planted variety by variety in the modern way. In the western part of the city,
the mineral-rich limestone soils lead to very good riesling, chardonnay, and pinot blanc. In
the southern part of the city, darker, heavier soils lead to fuller-bodied whites and are also
planted with Zweigelt and other red varieties. Still, it can take you aback just a bit to see a
plot of Zweigelt squeezed between two skyscrapers.
A heurige is an Austrian institution, and Vienna is full of them. Part winery, part wine bar, part giant café, heurigen are
                           where Austrians go to talk, argue, eat, kiss, and have a great time.

   Viennese viticulture has also laid the foundation for the heurigen. These wineries-cum-
cafés were where Austrian life was played out. People went to drink wine, eat, gossip,
argue, and hold hands—sometimes concomitantly. Heurigen now exist all over the
country, but some of the oldest and most infamous are in Vienna. The Heurige Franz
Mayer is a good example. The Mayer family makes wines from one of the best city plots,
the Alsegar vineyard, as well as from other, less distinguished urban vineyards. All of
these wines, noble and lackluster alike, are cheerfully consumed at the family’s boisterous,
cacophonous, eight-hundred-seat heurige, where it is said Beethoven wrote part of his
Ninth Symphony.
The tiny village of Aubonne surrounded by vineyards in the Vaud, a French-speaking part of Switzerland near Lake
    Geneva. Much of the wine produced in the Vaud is white, though counterintuitively, most Swiss wine is red.


                             WHEN YOU VISIT… AUSTRIA
        AUSTRIAN WINE COUNTRY is immaculate and movingly beautiful. (You won’t want to
        go home.) The vineyards are dotted with lovely small villages and historic towns, and
        the food everywhere is stunning. Many of the wineries have heurigen (restaurants)
        attached. Although most Austrian wineries do not have organized tours, proprietors,
        most of whom speak English, are accustomed to receiving guests by appointment.
        IF YOU ARE IN LOWER AUSTRIA, don’t miss the extraordinary wine academy known
        as Kloster Und, located just outside the historic city of Krems. A seventeenth-century
        Capuchin monastery, Kloster Und is not only a school but also a wine library, wine
        museum, and a luxury restaurant. In the vaulted stone cellar under the nave of the
        church, 150 Austrian wines are available for tasting.
SWITZERLAND
SWITZERLAND RANKS SEVENTEENTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE
SWISS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 12 GALLONS (47 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Switzerland is surrounded on all sides by some of Europe’s most prominent wine-
producing countries, and although its wines are not nearly as renowned (or numerous),
they are worthy of attention. To begin with, much of this small Alpine country (one-tenth
the size of California) is just simply too high, and therefore too cold, for grapevines to
grow successfully. Switzerland ranks seventeenth in the world in volume of wine
production, just after Hungary and Canada. Most of its wines come from the western,
predominantly French-speaking part of the country, and especially from the important
provinces, or cantons, as they are known in Switzerland, of Valais, Vaud, Neuchâtel, and
Geneva. Wine is also made, however, in the southern, Italian-speaking area known as
Ticino, and in the more eastern, German-speaking Ostschweiz.
   Switzerland (somewhat counterintuitively, given its climate) is mostly a red wine
producing country. The leading variety, in fact, is pinot noir, called blauburgunder, a light,
spicy, and often quite good wine, although rarely complex or nuanced in flavor. Some
tasty, light red wines are also made from pinot noir-gamay blends, which are called Dôle.
In the southern canton of Ticino, merlot has been growing since the early part of the
twentieth century, and again, the wines are light, sleek, fairly crisp, and sometimes spicy.
But perhaps the most intriguing red variety of all in Switzerland is the indigenous rouge
du pays (incorrectly called cornalin locally), which can be the source of super-juicy, spicy
wines redolent of black cherries and pomegranates.
With the Alps as a backdrop, a picnic with bottles of Swiss wine is just right for contemplation. Here, First Lake, which
can be reached only by cable car after a long hike. The lake, which is near Grindelwald, is 7,400 feet (2,260 meters) in
                                                        altitude.

   The major white grape variety is chasselas (known in the Valais as fendant and known
in German as gutedel), which makes light-bodied wines that range from neutral quaffing
wines to crisp whites laced with citrus and almond flavors. Other Swiss white wines
include sylvaner (the same as silvaner in Germany), pinot blanc, and pinot gris, plus
numerous native varieties like amigne, humagne blanche, and petite arvine, an ancient
grape that makes refreshing, floral, and exotically fruity wines.
   The 38,000 acres (15,400 hectares) of vineyards in Switzerland can be enormously
challenging to work because of their steepness. Along with the vineyards of Germany,
these are some of the steepest vineyards in the world, some of them—at 40 to 50 degree
slopes—appearing to be perilously close to vertical. As a result, terraces, called tablars,
are cut into the mountainsides, and grapes are often transported up and down the slopes on
monorails.
A tasting room near Lake Geneva specializes in wine from the terraced vineyards of Lavaux.
                              MILK’S HIGHER CALLING?
 Some would say it’s cheese. But every kid in the world would insist it’s milk chocolate—a Swiss creation.
 In 1875, milk chocolate was invented by Swiss candle maker Daniel Peter, who lived in the city of Vevey.
 Thanks to increasing competition from oil-burning lamps in Europe, Peter gave up candle making to go
 into his wife’s family business—chocolate. An astute entrepreneur, Peter hypothesized that the chocolate
 market could be expanded by making chocolate more nourishing, especially for children. With the help of
 his friend Henri Nestlé, then a baby food manufacturer, Peter invented a method for blending cocoa and
 the milk from alpine cows without souring the milk in the process. Four years later, the two formed the
 Nestlé Company.



                        THE QUICK SIP ON SWITZERLAND
         A COLD, MOUNTAINOUS country nestled in the Alps, Switzerland has obvious
         viticultural challenges. But despite these, the country boasts a small thriving wine
         industry.
         MOST SWISS WINE IS LIGHT, tasty and red; the leading variety in terms of volume is
         pinot noir.
         SWITZERLAND’S TOP WHITE is chasselas—a super-crisp wine, ideal for splicing
         through the rich flavors of the country’s famous Alpine cheeses.




                     Harvesting fendant (chasselas) grapes on the steep slopes of the Valais.

   Swiss wines are governed by an appellation system not unlike France’s, although the
wines are usually labeled by variety, making them fairly easy to understand. While Swiss
wines are not widely exported, here are a number of producers worth knowing on your
next Swiss hiking or skiing vacation: Domaine des Muses, Domaine E. de Montmollin &
Fils, Adrian Mathier, Rouvinez, and Angelo Delea.
                                                                   HUNGARY

HUNGARY RANKS FIFTEENTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE
HUNGARIANS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 6 GALLONS (21 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Of all the countries in the eastern part of Europe, none has had a more solid tradition of
producing great wines than Hungary. Its only possible rival is Austria, and although the
wines of Austria are certainly soaring in recognition today, the wines of Hungary were for
centuries the more esteemed of the two. In fact, from the seventeenth to the twentieth
century, Hungary possessed what was arguably the third most sophisticated wine culture
in Europe, after those of France and Germany. Among other distinctions, it was in the
1600s in Hungary’s famous Tokaj-Hegyalja (TOKE-eye hedge-AL-ya) region—not in
Bordeaux or Burgundy—that the first system for ranking wine on the basis of quality was
developed. By 1700, the best plots in Tokaj-Hegyalja were designated First, Second, or
Third Class, and strict royal decrees kept vineyard and winemaking practices at a very
high level.
    Modern Hungary, sitting virtually in the middle of eastern Europe, is a small country
bordered on the north by Slovakia, on the northeast by the Ukraine, on the east by
Romania, on the south by Croatia, Serbia, and Slovenia, and on the west by Austria. But
it’s worth noting that, from 1867 to the end of World War I, as the leading entity in the
Austro-Hungarian Empire, Hungary was one of the most powerful forces on the globe and
the second largest country in Europe, after the Russian Empire. At the height of its glory,
the Austro-Hungarian Empire included not only every country that borders Hungary
today, but also Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Czech Republic, and small parts of Italy,
Montenegro, and Poland.
   Vineyards have flourished in Hungary at least since Roman times. When the Magyars,
an ancient tribe in the Ural Mountains, from whom modern Hungarians are descended,
arrived in the region in the ninth century, they found vines growing everywhere and well-
established viticultural and winemaking practices in place. (The Magyars brought
something besides themselves to Hungary—namely their idiosyncratic language, which is
one of the few languages in Europe today that does not belong to the Indo-European
language family. As you’re about to experience, trying to pronounce Hungarian, which
belongs to the Uralic language family, can make you feel like you’ve got a mouth full of
marbles. Indeed, Hungarian, Turkish, and Greek are the only European languages that
have words for wine not derived from Latin; the Hungarian word for wine is bor. But in
the seventeenth century, it was the emergence in Tokaj-Hegyalja of the rare, extraordinary
wine Tokaji Aszú (TOKE-eye ah-SOO), commonly called simply Tokaji (spelled “Tokay”
in English), that put Hungary on the international wine map. Tokaji became and remains
not only the most stunning wine of eastern Europe, but one of the greatest dessert wines in
the world. Precious, rare, and a wine whose creation hinges on just the right weather
(more on this to follow), it represents just 4 to 6 percent of the country’s total wine
production each year. For an explanation of Hungarian wine law, see the Appendix on
Wine Laws, page 927.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Hungary is a landlocked country of grassy plains, orchards, forests, and vineyards. The
country is divided more or less in half by the Danube River, called the Duna in Hungarian,
which runs north to south through the entire country, much like the Mississippi River does
in the United States.

                                          BULL’S BLOOD
    One of the most popular, well-known dry reds of Hungary is Egri bikavér—“bull’s blood of Eger.” It is
    made primarily from the kékfrankos and kadarka grapes, grown in Eger, which is about halfway between
    Budapest and Tokaj. The legend behind the wine dates back to the mid-1500s, when the fortress of Eger,
    which belonged to the Magyars (ancestors to modern Hungarians), was besieged by the Turks. The
    Magyars (men, women, and reportedly even children) fought fiercely, drinking huge amounts of red wine
    in the process. As the story goes, when the Turks encountered the Magyars’ ferocious fighting skills and
    saw their red-stained faces, they retreated, fearing that the Magyars attained their prowess by drinking
    the blood of bulls.

    For a country just a bit larger than Scotland, Hungary grows a wide range of grape
varieties. This is possible partly because Hungary sits at a relatively northern latitude (on
par with Burgundy, France), so it is well suited to making crisp, light white wines from
fairly cool-climate varieties, but at the same time, much of the country possesses a
continental climate—warm to hot, sunny summers and very cold winters. This means that
Hungary can also ripen bold red varieties. Hungary’s top varieties include some that many
wine fans may not recognize, such as furmint (FUR-mint), hárslevelű (HARSH-leh-veh-
loo), juhfark (YOO-fark), kadarka (kah-DAR-kah), and kékoportó (KEK-oh-PORT-oh).
But Hungary is also home to many varieties such as olasz rizling (OH-lahs REEZ-ling),
kékfrankos (KEK-frank-osh), and Zweigelt (ZVEYE-gelt) that are common throughout
eastern Europe. Then there’s a whole brigade of well-known varieties—everything from
sauvignon blanc, gewürztraminer (known in Hungary as tramini), and pinot gris (known
as szürkebarát) to cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, and pinot noir. As for the types of
wine Hungary makes, more than 70 percent of total wine production is white. And finally,
most Hungarian wines are labeled varietally, with the wine region noted on the label. It
may also be helpful to know that many wine labels adhere to the Hungarian custom of
listing a surname first, so the wine brand Demeter Zoltán is owned by the wine-maker
Zoltán Demeter.
 The Hungarian Parliament sits on the banks of the Danube River. Begun in 1885, it is Hungary’s largest building and
                       remains one of the most impressive legislative buildings in Europe.


                               THE QUICK SIP ON HUNGARY
           HUNGARY IS ONE OF THE MOST important wine regions in eastern Europe. For most
           of the modern era, however, Hungarian wines were little known outside of the Soviet
           Union and other Communist countries, thanks to forty years of Communist rule, from
           1949 to 1989.
           HUNGARY’S MOST IMPRESSIVE WINE is Tokaji Aszú, considered one of the great
           dessert wines of the world.
           ALTHOUGH SMALL IN SIZE, Hungary boasts an enormous number of different grape
           varieties, including indigenous grapes, such as furmint and kékfrankos, and
           international varieties, such as chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon.

   Of Hungary’s twenty-two wine regions, seven are considered the most important, based
on the historic quality of their wines. By far, the most prestigious of these is Tokaj-
Hegyalja, the region where Tokaji is produced, in the northeastern part of the country,
known as the Northern Massif, along the Slovakian border. The six other important wine
areas are Badacsony, Somló, Szekszárd, Villány-Siklós, Eger, and Mátra.
   Badacsony and Somló are in the central, Transdanubia, region in the west, near Lake
Balaton, one of the largest lakes in Europe. Badacsony produces primarily white wines
from chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, szürkebarát (pinot gris), and olasz rizling (the same as
welschriesling in Austria and graševina in Croatia). Somló, one of the smallest, most
beautiful, and remote wine regions in Hungary (there are no paved roads and no
electricity), has volcanic soils and is the source of traditional wood-aged, partially
oxidized, powerful, dense white wines (from furmint, hárslevelű, juhfark, and others) that
can be a challenge to appreciate if your palate is accustomed to fresh, light, modern-style
whites. Nonetheless, Hungarians insist Somló whites are a specialty, and that they’re
especially perfect with heavy Hungarian dishes. The Hapsburgs believed that drinking the
rare Somló wine juhfark (the name means “sheep’s tail”) guaranteed a pregnant woman
that she would bear a boy.
                              THE GRAPES OF HUNGARY
                                               WHITES
CHARDONNAY AND SAUVIGNON BLANC: Important international grapes increasingly grown
throughout Hungary.
CSERSZEGI FŰSZERES: Widely planted grape that makes crisp, citrusy whites for every-night drinking.
The word fűszeres is the flavor term Hungarians use to mean “spicy,” and is also used with paprika to
differentiate spicy paprika from sweet or smoky.
FURMINT: The most important grape in Tokaji Aszú, Hungary’s famous sweet wine. Also makes dry
wines. Very high in acid.
HÁRSLEVELŰ: The second most important grape in Tokaji Aszú. Contributes a floral and fruity aroma.
IRSAI OLIVÉR: Important white grape for making soft, slightly aromatic every-night white wines.
JUHFARK: A rare but distinctive native grape that, blended with furmint and hárslevelű, is used to make
the intentionally oxidized, powerful, dense white wines of Somló.
KIRÁLYLEÁNYKA: A popular, light, fresh, grapey wine. The name means “little princess.”
MUSCAT LUNEL: See Sárga muskotály.
OLASZ RIZLING: A specialty of Transdanubia, west of the Danube River. Despite its name, it is not a
true riesling, but rather another name for the Croatian grape graševina. In Austria, next door, olasz rizling
is called welschriesling.
OTTONEL MUSKOTÁLY: Also known as muscat Ottonel. Grown mostly in Mátra and Eger, where it
makes fine dry wines reminiscent of the muscat Ottonels made in Alsace, and serves as a blending
partner in sweet wines.
SÁRGA MUSKOTÁLY: Literally, “yellow muscat.” The Hungarian name for the grape muscat blanc à
petits grains; the third most important grape in Tokaji Aszú. Often referred to as muscat lunel in the Tokaji
region.
SZÜRKEBARÁT: Also known as pinot gris; makes well-regarded wines, especially when grown near
Lake Balaton.
TRAMINI: The same variety as gewürztraminer; imported from western Europe but now grown all over
Hungary.
ZÉTA, KÖVÉRSZŐLŐ, AND KABAR: Minor grapes used in Tokaji Aszú thanks to their susceptibility to
botrytis and their capacity to reach high sugar levels. Zéta was previously called orémus, but the name
was changed because Oremus is also a brand of Tokaji.

                                                 REDS
CABERNET SAUVIGNON, CABERNET FRANC, MERLOT, AND PINOT NOIR: Important international
grapes increasingly grown throughout Hungary.
KADARKA: Declining in importance in Hungary, although capable of making good, light-colored,
medium-bodied, slightly spicy reds. Probably of Balkan origin; in Hungary, it is a specialty of Szekszárd
and Eger.
KÉKFRANKOS: The same grape as blaufränkisch; sometimes blended with merlot and cabernet
sauvignon. Kékfrankos is the major grape in the famous Hungarian wine Egri bikavér—“bull’s blood” of
Eger.
KÉKOPORTÓ: This red grape makes common, somewhat undistinguished wine, especially in Villány-
Siklós. It’s the same as Austria’s blauer Portugieser.
ZWEIGELT: Like kékoportó, a red grape in Villány-Siklós, where it makes quite good red wine, but
perhaps better known in Austria, where it’s generally made into even better red wine.
          Anett and Attila Németh of Alana-Tokaj, a winery known for mind-blowingly delicious Tokaji.

   In the southern part of Transdanubia are two more important wine regions, Szekszárd
and Villány-Siklós. These are the two most dynamic wine regions in Hungary and the
regions where you are most likely to find producers using modern equipment and new oak
barrels. Each of these regions produces some of the country’s best red wines. Kadarka, a
specialty of Szekszárd, is said to be the ideal red wine for paprika-based dishes. In the
warm area known as Villány-Siklós, several top small producers make what are, for
Hungary, fairly full-bodied reds from cabernet sauvignon, kékfrankos, merlot, and
Zweigelt.
   Finally, there are Eger and Mátra, both of which are located, along with Tokaj-
Hegyalja, in the Northern Massif. Eger is noted for light-bodied reds as well as Hungary’s
popular dry red wine Egri bikavér (“bull’s blood”). Mátra, on the other hand, is white wine
territory. Here, very good-quality wines are made from olasz rizling and yellow muscat, as
well as chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, and sémillon. One of the best types of wine and a
local specialty, királyleányka (pronounced kir-ALL-ee-lee-AN-ka) is slightly aromatic and
tastes somewhat like gewürztraminer. Although it’s most often drunk by large Hungarian
men, királyleányka means “little princess.”
    None of Hungary’s most important wine regions are in the Great Alföld, the vast, hot,
flat plain south of Budapest, where nonetheless more than half of the country’s vineyards
are found. Most of the simple, inexpensive quaffing wines produced here are based on
international varieties, such as chardonnay and merlot, which were first planted in
Hungary after phylloxera swept the country in the 1870s, and then later planted even more
extensively in the 1970s and 1980s. In total, Hungary has about 158,000 acres (63,900
hectares) of vineyards, making it sixteenth in the world in terms of area under vine.
   As for who makes Hungarian wines, for the forty years prior to the fall of Communism
in 1989, the Hungarian wine industry was controlled by the state. Grapes were grown on
enormous state-run farms, wines were made in large cooperatives, and all wine exports
were controlled by a single large state-owned trading organization. Wines not consumed in
Hungary were sold in bulk, by tanker truck, almost exclusively to the Soviet Union or East
Germany. Wine quality was dismal, almost without exception. The post-Communist
decade brought hope, but also confusion over vineyard ownership rights, foreign
investments, and newly devised governmental regulations. Today, Hungary’s wine
industry is still taking the economically demanding steps toward modernization, and better
wines are slowly claiming the spotlight. As of 2012, there were an estimated 515 wineries,
but many grape growers—especially those with less than 2 acres (0.8 hectare) of
vineyards—are still too economically disadvantaged to vinify and market their own wines.
Yet, if Tokaji is any model, the country’s wines might well undergo a significant
revolution in quality as the twenty-first century unfolds.

              THE MOST IMPORTANT HUNGARIAN WINES
                                        LEADING WINES
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         EGRI BIKAVÉR red
         FURMINT white (dry and sweet)
         HÁRSLEVELŰ white (dry and sweet)
         IRSAI OLIVÉR white
         KÉKFRANKOS red
         KÉKOPORTÓ red
         KIRÁLYLEÁNYKA white
         MERLOT red
         MUSCAT white (dry and sweet)
         OLASZ RIZLING white
         OTTONEL MUSKOTÁLY white
         PINOT NOIR red
         SZÜRKEBARÁT white
         TOKAJI ASZÚ white (sweet)
         TOKAJI ASZÚ ESSZENCIA white (sweet)
         TOKAJI ESSZENCIA white (sweet)
         ZWEIGELT red

                                        WINES OF NOTE
         CSERSZEGI FŰSZERES white
         JUHFARK white
         SZAMORODNI white (dry and semisweet)
                                       TOKAJI

Over the millennia of wine’s existence, there have been multiple occasions when politics,
war, and/or disease have combined to nearly destroy a wine region and its wines. No more
poignant example exists than the region Tokaj-Hegyalja (TOKE-eye hedge-AL-ya) and its
wine, known as Tokaji (TOKE-eye). Yet despite the historic difficulties that it has
endured, the wine that French King Louis XV offered to Madame de Pompadour, calling it
vinum regum, rex vinorum —“the wine of kings and the king of wines”—is the most
profound sweet wine in the world. To drink it means letting go of every assumption you
may have of sweet wine, for Tokaji is a flavor world unto itself.
   Tokaji’s near demise began with the deadly pest phylloxera. As the twentieth century
dawned, the vineyards of Tokaji lay in ruin as a result of the insect. Over the next several
decades, vineyards were rebuilt only to be devastated again during World War I, the break
up of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and World War II. But the biggest upheaval was yet
to come. In 1949, as Hungary collapsed under Communist rule, wineries and vineyards
were confiscated and nationalized. The preciously refined and highly individual sweet
wines of Tokaj were blended en masse in big cooperative cellars run by the state. Over
subsequent years, vineyards were neglected, equipment deteriorated, the quality of grapes
declined drastically, old winemaking traditions were abolished in favor of cheaper, easier
shortcuts, and winemaking itself was degraded to the point where it was little more than
bureaucratic drudgery. By the mid-1980s, the innocuous wines called Tokaji bore no
resemblance to the wines once considered so extraordinarily delicious (not to mention
their purported therapeutic and aphrodisiacal properties) that a detachment of Russian
soldiers was regularly stationed in the region to procure sufficient supplies and then escort
them to the court of Czar Peter the Great.
                                  HOW SWEET THEY ARE
 Tokaji Aszú is one of the most decadent but well-balanced sweet wines in the world, thanks to the natural
 acidity in the grapes. The sweetness of Tokaji is measured in puttonyos. The word is a derivation of
 puttony, the name of the basket in which the aszú grapes were traditionally gathered. (See page 633 for
 details.) Below are the legal requirements for the sugar content that wines of the various numbers of
 puttonyos must have. (In 2014, the levels 3 puttonyos and 4 puttonyos were legally abolished, but given
 the longevity of Tokaji, wines with these designations will appear on the market well into the future, and
 so I have included them below.) In practice, many wineries make Tokaji Aszús that exceed the degree of
 sweetness required for a particular number of puttonyos. So, a wine labeled 5 puttonyos may contain 20
 percent residual sugar even though the law requires only between 12 and 15 percent. Note the residual
 sugar of Tokaji Esszencia—an off-the-charts 450 to 900 grams of sugar per liter (45 to 90 percent)! (For
 comparison’s sake, the residual sugar in a French Sauternes is about 120 grams, or roughly equal to that
 of a 4-puttonyos Tokaji Aszú.)
 3 PUTTONYOS
 6 to 9 percent residual sugar (60 to 90 grams per liter residual sugar)
 4 PUTTONYOS
 9 to 12 percent residual sugar (90 to 120 grams per liter residual sugar)
 5 PUTTONYOS
 12 to 15 percent residual sugar (120 to 150 grams per liter residual sugar)
 6 PUTTONYOS
 15 to 18 percent residual sugar (150 to 180 grams per liter residual sugar)
 TOKAJI ASZÚ ESSZENCIA
 18 to 45 percent residual sugar (180 to 450 grams per liter residual sugar)
 TOKAJI ESSZENCIA
 45 to 90 percent residual sugar (450 to 900 grams per liter residual sugar)

    Luckily Tokaji was not beyond redemption. When Hungary became a democratic
republic in 1989, the government invited prominent western European vintners to partner
with them to resurrect Tokaji. Foreign investment in the region swiftly followed. By the
fall of that year, a group of key investors, including Lord Jacob Rothschild, the British
wine authority Hugh Johnson, and the noted Bordeaux winemaker Peter Vinding-Diers,
formed the Royal Tokaji Wine Company in conjunction with sixty-three of the best
remaining winegrowers. Within three years, a slew of other foreign investors, consultants,
winemakers, and businessmen acquired estates and vineyards. These included the Laborde
family of Château Clinet in Pomerol, Bordeaux, who helped found Château Pajzos; the
Álvarez family, owners of Spain’s most famous wine estate, Vega-Sicilia, who founded
Oremus; and three French multinational insurance companies, one of which, AXA, also
owns Bordeaux’s Château Pichon-Longueville Baron and Château Suduiraut, as well as
the famous Port wine firm Quinta do Noval. AXA’s Tokaji firm is called Disznókő. The
financial capital these companies brought was formidable. In less than half a decade,
Tokaji was reborn.
The ancient underground cellars of Royal Tokaji Wine Company, one of the first wine joint ventures in Hungary after the
                                                 fall of Communism.
                     SERVING AND DRINKING TOKAJI ASZÚ
 Tokaji Aszú is usually drunk in small amounts (a 2-ounce/60-milliliter serving is customary) and the wine
 should always be lightly chilled, but not icy cold. Because Tokaji is considered ready to drink upon
 release, there is no need to age it. That said, you certainly can age it if you want to, since the wine’s high
 concentrations of sugar and acid act as preservatives. (In a remarkable show of delayed gratification,
 eastern European royal families would sometimes age the wine for close to a hundred years.) And,
 because of its sweetness, an opened but unfinished bottle of Tokaji will last for many months, especially
 if you keep it in the refrigerator. While drinking Tokaji Aszú by itself can be perfect (the wine doesn’t really
 need food), Tokaji’s richness and underlying acidity do make it a fascinating partner for many dishes. In
 Hungary, it is traditionally served with celebratory desserts, such as crêpes (palacsinták, literally
 “pancakes”) filled with thick chocolate cream, apricot cake, or else paired hedonistically with foie gras, or
 a blue cheese like Roquefort or Stilton.

   Tokay, as formerly noted, is the English spelling of Tokaji, (the i means “of,” so Tokaji
means “from the place Tokaj”). The Tokaj region, known officially as Tokaj-Hegyalja
(“Tokaj Hill”), is about 120 miles (190 kilometers) northeast of Budapest, close to the
Slovakian border. It includes twenty-seven villages spread over sloping hills, the remnants
of ancient volcanoes. As of 2014, there were just under 15,000 acres (6,070 hectares) of
vines in the Tokaj region, making it about one-third the size of the tiny Napa Valley, for
example. The vineyards belong to about fifty leading producers of Tokaji, as well as
hundreds of family-run operations, many of which make very small amounts of wine for
their own and local consumption. Indeed, the average size of a vineyard here is just 1.4
acres (.57 hectares).
   The Tokaj region produces both dry and sweet wines, but it is the lusciously honeyed
wine Tokaji Aszú for which it is world famous. Indeed, Tokaji Aszú has been called “the
Sauternes of eastern Europe,” but perhaps the phrase should be reversed and Sauternes
should be called “the Tokaji Aszú of France,” since it was in the Tokaj region, not
Sauternes, that the world’s first sweet, botrytized wines were made.
   During the Middle Ages, wines from the region were highly regarded and many
vineyards were owned by members of the royalty. The style of those wines, and whether
they were sweet or dry, remains unknown. However, one of the first recorded mentions of
aszú grapes appeared in the Nomenklatura of Fabricius Balázs Szikszai, which was
completed in 1576. And a recently discovered inventory of aszú wines predates this
reference by five years. By the mid-1600s, a chaplain named Máté Szepsi Laczkó had also
begun experimenting with furmint grapes left to ripen to the point where they were
shriveled and had begun rotting, before picking them. Miraculously, the small amount of
liquid that oozed from them tasted like honey. When the chaplain blended this nectar with
the regular table wine from the previous year, the prototype of Tokaji Aszú was born.
MAKING TOKAJI ASZÚ
Like all wines made with the help of Botrytis cinerea, Tokaji Aszú is dependent on a
singular set of climatic conditions. For the botrytis fungus to take hold on healthy, ripe
grapes, the region must have just the right amount of humidity and warmth (too little or
too much can produce problems). Tokaj-Hegyalja is well situated. The Carpathian
mountains, which arc around the region, shelter it from cold winds from the east, north,
and west, creating prolonged, gently warm autumns. The region, shaped like a check
mark, lies along a range of volcanic hills topped with loess, fine-grained deposits of silt, as
well as volcanic tufa, both of which warm easily. Following the length of these hills is the
Bodrog River, which meets the Tisza River at the bottom point of the check mark, near the
village of Tokaj. Mists and humidity rising from these rivers are held in place by the warm
hills, creating the perfect environment for botrytis to form.
     The three main white grapes used in Tokaji are ideally suited for this purpose. Furmint,
which makes up about 60 percent of all grapes planted in the region, is high in acid, late-
ripening, thin-skinned, and easily susceptible to botrytis. Hárslevelű—the name means
“linden leaf”—is second in importance, and although slightly less susceptible to botrytis,
it, too, is high in acid as well as very aromatic and rich-tasting. Third in importance, sárga
muskotály, also known as muscat blanc à petits grains, is both highly aromatic and crisply
acidic. It is used as a seasoning grape. The fact that all three of these grapes naturally
possess a bracing level of acidity means that, even at its sweetest, Tokaji Aszú tastes
beautifully balanced, not saccharine or candied. Since the 1990s, three other grapes—all
of which are botrytis-prone and capable of attaining high sugar levels—are also allowed in
Tokaji and are sometimes included in minor amounts: zéta (formerly called orémus),
kövérszőlő, and kabar.
    The beneficial botrytis mold punctures the grapes’ skins in search of water to germinate
its spores. This causes water in the grapes to evaporate, and the grapes begin to dehydrate.
Inside the shriveled grapes, the sugar and acid in the juice become progressively more
concentrated. It is a perfect system to foster sweetness, but it’s not without challenges.
Botrytis spreads erratically, affecting some grapes and not others, some bunches and not
others. It also moves through the vineyards sporadically; in some years, when little or no
botrytis takes hold, no Tokaji Aszú will be produced.
                                    A PASSION FOR PAPRIKA
 It’s hard to imagine that three centuries ago, one of the (now) defining ingredients of the Hungarian
 kitchen—paprika—was not yet known in Hungary. But paprika, along with several other Hungarian
 culinary essentials—tomatoes, sour cherries, coffee, and phyllo (which the Hungarians immortalized by
 reinventing as strudel)—were all introduced by the Turks during their numerous occupations. Be that as it
 may, in Hungary, paprika found its truest admirers and its raison d’être. Fiery and passionate themselves,
 Hungarians like their dishes to have drama. Even something as simple as paprika chicken (paprikás
 csirke) is a kind of lusty and luscious duel between the tangy richness of sour cream on the one hand
 and the tantalizing bite of paprika on the other. Of course, in Hungary, paprika is not a single thing. The
 Hungarians classify it into eight types, starting with the mildest and sweetest, Különleges, which is bright
 red in color, and proceeding to Erős, a very spicy version that is light brown in color. The region of
 Szeged is generally considered to produce the best paprika in Hungary. Interestingly, the peppers used
 to make paprika have the highest vitamin C content of any vegetable. Indeed, paprika was used in
 numerous experiments by Hungarian physiologist Albert Szent-Györgyi, who won the Nobel Prize in
 Physiology and Medicine in 1937 for his discovery of vitamin C.




Botrytized grapes destined to become Hungary’s elixir, Tokaji Aszú, one of the world’s most sensational wines. Hungary
was the first country in the world to make wine from grapes affected by noble rot. Each perfectly shriveled berry will be
                                            picked out of the cluster by hand.

   Producers differ slightly in how they make Tokaji Aszú, but generally speaking the
process goes like this. First, throughout the fall, the shriveled aszú grapes are picked by
hand, berry by berry—not cluster by cluster—from botrytis-affected bunches. These aszú
grapes are then brought to the winery, where they are lightly crushed into a paste.
Meanwhile, the rest of the crop (all the grapes and bunches not affected by botrytis) is
picked separately and made into a base wine. The aszú paste is added in various
proportions to the base wine of the same year. (In the past, aszú was sometimes added to a
base wine held back from the previous year; this practice is now rare.)
   The proportions of aszú added are measured in puttonyos. A puttony is a basket in
which the aszú grapes were traditionally gathered. It holds 44 to 55 pounds (20 to 25
kilograms) of grapes, equal to about 5.2 gallons (20 liters) of aszú paste. The ratio of
puttonyos to base wine in each barrel determined the sweetness of the wine. The
traditional barrels, called gönci (after the village of Gönc, known for its barrel makers),
hold about 140 liters of wine. Thus, based on 140 liters, and just for the sake of a simple
example, a wine labeled, say, Tokaji Aszú 2 Puttonyos would have 40 liters of aszú paste
and 100 liters of base wine. A wine labeled Tokaji Aszú 4 Puttonyos would be even richer
and sweeter, as it would have 80 liters of aszú paste and 60 liters of base wine. A 4- or 5-
puttonyos Tokaji would be about as sweet and concentrated as a German beerenauslese.
The sweetest Tokaji Aszús are 6 puttonyos and they are technically much sweeter than
Sauternes (but don’t taste like they are, because of Tokaji’s vibrant acidity). Today, Tokaji
Aszú is usually made in stainless-steel tanks rather than in barrels, and the number of
puttonyos assigned is now officially based on the amount of residual sugar the wine
contains (see page 629) rather than picking baskets.




Classified as Pro Mensa Ceasaris Primus, the Super First Class Mézes Mály vineyard is one of the two most renowned in
                                                  the Tokaj region.

    Depending on the concentration of sweetness in the aszú grapes when they were
picked, the aszú paste will steep in the base wine for as little as eight hours or as long as
three days. At this point, the sweetened wine will be drawn off the aszú paste and allowed
to ferment again in Tokaj’s small, narrow cellars, dug centuries ago as places to hide
during Turkish invasions. In these single-vaulted, cold, damp, moldy cellars, the second
fermentation can take months, even years, since the cold temperatures coupled with the
high sugar content of the wine slow down the process. Under current law, Tokaji Aszú
must be aged for at least three years in oak barrels and in bottle before being sold. The
bottles are always the traditional, squat, 500-milliliter Tokaji Aszú bottles, three-quarters
the size of a standard wine bottle.
   In the past, as the Tokaji wines aged, the barrels would not be topped up, leaving air
space in each. At the same time, a special strain of natural yeasts, which flourished in
Tokaj’s cool, dark cellars, would coat the surface of the wine with a fine film, rather like
flor in Sherry. The combination of the yeasts and the partial, controlled oxidation of the
wine would contribute yet another unique flavor to Tokaji Aszú. Today, most Tokaji Aszús
are intentionally made in completely full barrels and tanks so that they are protected from
oxygen and their fruity/floral character is preserved, although yeasts (omnipresent in these
cellars) still contribute to the flavor.
    There are two other categories of rare, super-concentrated Tokaji Aszús: Tokaji Aszú
Esszencia and Tokaji Esszencia (the word Esszencia—“essence”—is also sometimes
spelled with one s—eszencia—and sometimes spelled essencia). Let me address Tokaji
Esszencia first, as it is the most luxurious, hedonistic Tokaji of all. Only a minuscule
amount is made, and only in exceptionally good years. The wine is, of course,
frighteningly expensive. To make it, aszú grapes are put in a cask and the juice that runs
free from these grapes, out of the bottom of the cask (traditionally through a goose quill
put in the bunghole of the cask), with no pressure other than the weight of the grapes on
top, is Tokaji Esszencia. At 45 percent to 90 percent sugar, this liquid is so syrupy and
sweet that the yeasts, slowed to a stupor, barely manage to do their work, and the luscious
liquid ferments unbelievably slowly—sometimes barely at all. A Château Pajzos Tokaji
Esszencia from the legendary vintage of 1993 took four years to ferment to 4.7 percent
alcohol, and a Royal Tokaji Company Tokaji Esszencia from the same 1993 vintage was
still fermenting in 1999! In the end most Tokaji Esszencias may only reach an alcohol
level of 2 to 5 percent. But simply to say the wine is sweet does not do it justice. The color
of honey, velvety rich, and tasting of molecularly dense apricots and peaches, Tokaji
Esszencia is one of the world’s most penetrating and profound taste sensations, rendering
wine lovers (including this one) speechless. It is said to be one of the longest lasting of all
wines, capable of aging for centuries. Historically it was reserved for royalty, who
sometimes drank it on their deathbeds, hoping to be revived by its mysterious medical
powers.
   Tokaji Esszencia is so rare and precious that most of it is not bottled on its own but
instead is blended sparingly into 6-puttonyos Tokaji Aszú to make the highly revered
Tokaji Aszú Esszencia, itself a rare, super-expensive, extraordinary wine that is also made
only in exceptional years. Tokaji Aszú Esszencia must be aged five years, of which three
must be in the barrel.

THE TOKAJI CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
The vineyards of Tokaj were the first in the world to be classified according to quality. In
1700, about a century and a half before Bordeaux’s 1855 Classification, Prince Rákóczi
issued a royal decree assigning the vineyards of Tokaj rankings of first, second, and third
class, using the Latin designations Primae Classis, Secunde Classis, and so on. In
addition, two vineyards, Csarfas and Mézes Mály, were given a special designation, a sort
of super-first-class status called Pro Mensa Caesaris Primus, or “chosen for the royal
table.” In total, 173 vineyards were classified, and others that were not particularly well
sited were listed as unclassified. Throughout much of the forty-year Communist regime,
with vineyards in poor condition, the classification system was largely meaningless. But in
1995, the top producers of Tokaji formed an association called Tokaj Renaissance, with
the goal of reviving the significance of the old classification system. It is now common to
see vineyard names such as Betsek and Szt. Tamás on Tokaji labels, along with their
rankings; in this case, both are First Class.




OTHER WINES OF THE TOKAJ REGION
The enormous viticultural and winemaking improvements of the 1990s not only elevated
the quality of Tokaji Aszú, but they also vastly improved the region’s dry white wines.
Dry furmint bottled as a single variety makes a crisp, complex white wine that’s delicious
and often minerally. Try the fantastic dry furmints of Balassa, Barta, and Gróf Degenfeld
wineries. Hárslevelű is softer, slightly creamy, and has the added bonus of an appealingly
fruity aroma. And Ottonel muskotály (the other muscat, besides ságra muskotály, that is
grown in Tokaj) often has ripe peach, apricot, and quince flavors.
                                         TOKAJI ALLURE
 Perhaps more than any other wine in history, Tokaji has been the wine of the famous, the powerful, the
 pious, and the noble. Its description as “the king of wines and the wine of kings” comes from the early
 eighteenth century, after Francis II Rákóczi, Prince of Transylvania, gave Tokaji to King Louis XIV of
 France as a gift, resulting in the wine becoming a regular favorite of the French court at Versailles. Next,
 Louis XV made it a special gift for Madame de Pompadour. Later, Emperor Franz Josef (who was also
 king of Hungary) developed a tradition of sending Tokaji Aszú to England’s Queen Victoria as a yearly
 birthday present—one bottle for every month she had lived. On her eighty-first, in 1900, she received 972
 bottles (a significant present—and something of a shame, since this was her final birthday). Artists,
 writers, and musicians loved Tokaji—the wine was a favorite of Beethoven, Liszt, Schubert, Haydn,
 Goethe, Heinrich Heine, Friedrich von Schiller, Johann Strauss, and Voltaire. Emperor Peter the Great of
 Russia and Emperor Napoléon III of France both consumed Tokaji heavily—Napoléon, for example,
 bought thirty to forty full barrels of Tokaji every year. Needless to say, Tokaji was the near-religious elixir
 preferred by many popes.

   In addition to these dry wines, Tokaj is also now making late-harvest sweet wines that
are not Tokaji Aszú. Late-harvest Tokaji, rather like German beerenauslese, is a late-
harvest sweet wine that may have been made with the benefit of some botrytized bunches
of grapes. But that is different than Tokaji Aszú where, as noted above, a paste is made
from entirely botrytized berries, the paste is combined with wine, and then the whole is
refermented. Two late-harvest wines to try include Oremus Tokaji Furmint Noble Late
Harvest and Château Pajzos Muskotály.
   Yet another type of wine made in the Tokaj region is szamorodni, which means “as it is
grown” or “as it comes.” When vineyards are not sufficiently affected by botrytis to
produce enough aszú berries to make Tokaji Aszú, a blended wine from Tokaji’s three
main grapes is made. The szamorodni may be dry (száraz) or slightly sweet (édes).
Szamorodni must be aged two years in the barrel, and most often barrels are not topped up,
so the wine takes on a partially oxiydized, intriguing toasted-nut character similar to that
of Sherry.
                  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF TOKAJI ASZÚ
   Alana-Tokaj • Château Pajzos • Disznókő • Dobogó • Hétszőlő • István Szepsy • Oremus • Royal Tokaji
                                             Wine Company
Early morning mists over the Bodrog River encourage the development of Botrytis cinerea in the surrounding vineyards
of Tokaj-Hegyalja. The noble rot, along with the land itself and the painstaking way in which Tokaji is made, all conspire
                              to make a wine that has unreal deliciousness and elegance.


                                WHEN YOU VISIT… HUNGARY
            The most fascinating (and easiest) Hungarian wineries to visit are those of Tokaj-
            Hegyalja, in northeast Hungary, about 120 miles (190 kilometers) from Budapest. The
            majority of Tokaj’s leading wineries are located in or near the sleepy village of Mád
            (easy to remember). With an advance appointment, tours can usually be conducted in
            English.
            IF, ON YOUR WAY TO OR FROM wine country, you stop overnight in Budapest, be
            sure to dine at Gundel, the palatial nineteenth-century restaurant restored in 1992 by
            international businessman Ronald Lauder (of Estée Lauder) and the late United States
            restaurant consultant George Lang. The menu is devoted entirely to traditional
            Hungarian classics, including legendary Hungarian pastries.
                        The Hungarian Wines to Know
Hungary’s dry white and red wines are not yet widely exported and thus are not always easy to find. So, while I
have included a few outstanding dry wines here, most of the wines below are sweet Tokaji wines—Hungary’s ultra-
famous specialty.

                                                   WHITES




                                                SZŐKE MÁTYÁS

                                             IRSAI OLIVÉR | MÁTRA
                                                 100% irsai olivér
I knew nothing about irsai olivér (a cross created in Hungary in the 1930s) or the dry white wines made from it
until late 2013, when I encountered this exploding bomb of fruit from the Szőke Mátyás winery. Although it’s
fantastically fruity and aromatic, with roselike notes, it also carefully skirts the problem of being too perfumed by
having flashes of lime-skin bitterness and a distinct minerality. Irsai olivér is not as weighty or viscous as many
other aromatic varieties can be, but it’s weighty enough to invite any spicy dish to play along. The Szőke family’s
vineyards are in the Mátra foothills, about an hour and a half northeast of Budapest, near Hungary’s highest extinct
volcano, Kékes, which is part of a long-dormant volcanic chain that extends all the way to Tokaj. Szőke means
“blond” in Hungarian, a reference to the proprietor Mátyás’s mane of hair when he was younger.
                                              DEMETER ZOLTÁN

                               HÁRSLEVELŰ | SZERELMI | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                                                  100% hárslevelű
Zoltán Demeter studied wine in France and the United States before returning to Hungary to be the assistant to the
country’s star winemaker, István Szepsy. It’s been said that this was the first modern, dry hárslevelű to show that
the grape is capable of greatness. The wine is based on sixty-year-old vines planted in the pure loess soils of the
Szerelmi vineyard in Tokaj-Hegyalja. And what a wine. Massive, opulent, and softly creamy on the one hand, it is
also spicy, sassy, and intense on the other. It’s as if crème caramel met Kaffir lime. Thoroughly delicious.




                                          DOMAINE KIRÁLYUDVAR

                                      FURMINT SEC | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                                                   100% furmint
Domaine Királyudvar’s (kee-RYE-oohd-var) is one of the best dry furmints I’ve ever tasted. Its gingery, minerally
fresh aroma is pure and distinctive, and the wine’s flavors—an exotic marriage of preserved lemons, baked pears,
and brioche—are both lively and creamy at the same time. Although it’s rich and satisfying, the wine is also airy,
light, and ethereal. A stunning wine. Királyudvar (the name means “king’s court”) dates to the eleventh century,
when the estate supplied wines to the Imperial Court of the Hapsburgs. In the modern era, it was purchased in 1997
by Anthony Hwang (an owner of the renowned French estate Domaine Huët in the Loire), who restored the
vineyards and estate.

                                                      RED
                                                GERE ATTILA

                                     KOPÁR CUVÉE | VILLÁNY-SIKLÓS
                  Approximately 50% cabernet franc, 45% merlot, 5% cabernet sauvignon
From the Villány part of Villány-Siklós, where the soils are loess and red clay along with dolomite and limestone,
comes Kopár Cuvée, Attila Gere’s top wine. The fruit comes from vineyards on the extinct volcano Kopár, which
means “barren” (a reference to the poor soils). Of all of the regions in Hungary, Villány is known for the
commanding structure of its red wines, and for the ambitions of its winemakers, who closely follow the great wines
of Bordeaux, Napa Valley, and Tuscany. Indeed, Kopár Cuvée’s edgy, bitter grip, its wonderful tobacco notes, plus
its aromas and flavors of cassis and cedar, are all very much in the jet stream of a good Bordeaux.

                                            SWEET WINES
                                                    OREMUS

                               LATE HARVEST | TOKAJI | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                                                   100% furmint
Oremus was the first producer to make late-harvest Tokaji, which is slightly less concentrated and complex than
Tokaji Aszú. Made from extremely ripe grapes (some clusters of which have botrytis), late-harvest Tokajis are not
made with aszú paste in the traditional manner of Tokaji Aszú. But there’s no lack of beauty here. Indeed, the
wine’s deep, honeyed-apricot richness has a crystalline purity and exquisite balance. Imagine the grown-up version
of highly concentrated dried apricots, liquefied into nectar. Oremus is owned by the Álvarez family, proprietor’s of
Spain’s most famous estate, Vega-Sicilia.
                                                 ALANA-TOKAJ

                                    MUSCAT | BETSEK | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                                         100% muscat blanc à petits grains
During my immersion into Hungarian wine, this was one of the most exquisite late-harvest wines I drank. The
luscious flavors of lychee are so mesmerizing and intense that I’m convinced this wine tastes more like lychees
than lychees do. But, far from monochromatic, Alana-Tokaj’s sweet muscat (specifically muscat blanc à petit
grains) from the Betsek vineyard (one of the vineyards historically ranked Primae Classis, First Class) soars into
rushes of flowery meadows, wild lavender, orange marmalade, lemon curd, white pepper, and allspice. Fresh and
vibrant, the wine seems thoroughly animated and alive. Winemaker Attila Gábor Németh and his family acquired
the last Tokaji vineyard holdings of the royal Hapsburg family in 2005, all of which were ranked First Class. Attila
immediately got down to work by severely cutting back the yields (now below those of Bordeaux’s Château
d’Yquem) and pushing the harvest as late as possible (into December/January in most years) to maximize the
concentration of the grapes’ flavors. Also not to be missed: Alana-Tokaj’s Aszueszencia, a Tokaji Aszú Esszencia
that’s mind-blowingly silken in texture and hypnotically rich.




                                               CHÂTEAU PAJZOS

                             TOKAJI ASZÚ | 5 PUTTONYOS | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                       Approximately 38% furmint, 27% muscat, 19% zéta, 16% hárslevelű
It’s hard to imagine a 5-puttonyos Tokaji that is more sensual than that of Château Pajzos. In great vintages, the
wine positively drips with the aromas and flavors of honeycomb, lavender, lilies, dried apricots, lime marmalade,
saffron, white pepper, wild herbs, meadows (and such is the complexity of the wine, that one could go on with even
more descriptors). Tasting it, it seems clear that every single exquisite molecule is lined up along the same intense
trajectory of flavor. As for a finish, the wine simply refuses to stop emanating deliciousness. Château Pajzos’s
Tokaji may well have one of the longest finishes of any wine in the world. Château Pajzos is owned by the Laborde
family, which also owns Bordeaux’s Château Clinet, in Pomerol.
                                                      DOBOGÓ

                              TOKAJI ASZÚ | 6 PUTTONYOS | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                                   60% furmint, 30% hárslevelű, 10% muscat lunel
Dobogó’s Tokaji is sheer voluptuousness in a bottle. In the first split second of the first sip, you are drenched in the
aromas and flavors of fresh pineapple, fresh tangerines, lemon curd, chamomile tea, and ginger. The very next
second, waves of white pepper and exotic spices appear to lift the wine up into a vibrating freshness. Indeed, this
wine is so intricate and light that the sweetness is very sheer and exquisite tasting. Dobogó (the name means
“heartbeat”) is a family winery begun in 1995 by Izabella Zwack and Attila Domokos.




                                       ROYAL TOKAJI WINE COMPANY

                      TOKAJI ASZÚ | SZT. TAMÁS | 6 PUTTONYOS | TOKAJ-HEGYALJA
                                     Approximately 70% furmint, 30% hárslevelű
From the Primae Classis (First Class) vineyard known as Szt. Tamás (St. Thomas) come distinctive Tokajis that
stop you in your tracks, they are so fascinating, delicious, and long. Indeed, Szt. Tamás Tokajis often display
aromas and flavors evocative of lemon verbena tea, roasted apricots, peach puree, minerals, sea salt, dried herbs,
and honeycomb. They never come across as sweet, exactly, but rather as something refined, richly delicious, and so
light that the flavors feel as if they are floating on a cloud. The Royal Tokaji Wine Company was founded in 1990
by a group of investors that included the prominent English wine expert Hugh Johnson.
REPUBLIC OF GEORGIA

It’s not every day you get a call from a holy man. But in the summer of 2011, sitting in my
office in the Napa Valley, I picked up the ringing phone and to my utter surprise, on the
other end of the line was a monk and the winemaker of the eleventh-century Alaverdi
Monastery in Kakheti, Republic of Georgia. He asked if he and his colleagues could meet
with me and bring their wines to taste. There is only one answer to that question, and so
the next day a bearded man clad in voluminous black robes with a large Orthodox
Christian cross hanging from his neck and a rosary in his hand walked into my office,
followed by ten other Georgian vintners. Before they sat down, they sang a folk song, for
an old Georgian tradition insists that men sing before they drink.




                     Qvevri waiting to be filled with wine, then buried underground.

   Many of the wines they brought with them were so-called “orange wines”—almost
neon orange in color—that had been made in qvevri (KEV-ree), large, egg-shaped clay
vessels, lined with beeswax and buried entirely underground. Drinking these wines was
like nothing I had ever experienced.
   One of the oldest agricultural societies in the world, Georgia is nestled on the isthmus
between the Black and Caspian Seas, and lies just north of Turkey and south of Russia and
the great Caucasus Mountains. Wine has been made here for over eight thousand years,
and Georgia, along with Turkey, Iran, Armenia, and Azerbaijan, is considered one of the
world’s earliest sites of grapevine domestication and winemaking. For millennia, much of
that wine was renowned. But throughout the twentieth century, Georgia was caught in the
political turmoil of the Soviet Union (of which it was a part) and wine quality suffered.
Suppressed, the wine industry regressed. Then, in 1991, Georgia gained its political
independence and began the long, slow road back to reestablishing its fine wine industry.




 The Georgians are very spiritual about the harvest and about wine, considering it a mystical beverage. Wine is always
     part of the country’s frequent feasting rituals that involve much sipping and elaborate, contemplative toasts.

   There are wine districts in every part of this small country, and the vineyards—which
cover 112,000 acres (45,300 hectares)—are planted primarily with fascinating native
varieties, and sometimes with international varieties, like cabernet sauvignon. The most
important native grapes are the white grapes rkatsiteli (ARE-cats-i-tell-ee) and mtsvane
(metz-VAH-neh), and the red grape saperavi (sah-per-RAV-ee).




                        A Georgian wine cellar with sealed qvevri buried underneath the floor.
   Rkatsiteli is a hardy grape with significant acidity and delicate green apple flavors,
while mtsvane is fruity and aromatic (the two are often blended). For its part, saperavi—
one of the few grapes in the world with red pulp—produces deeply colored, dramatic
wines with wild berry, peppery, and gamy flavors, not unlike syrah. The best examples of
both of these grapes are grown in the highly regarded Kakheti region, in the foothills of
the Caucasus, where the continental climate and well-drained slopes are ideal for wine-
growing. Interestingly, a large portion of the grapes grown and harvested by small farmers
each year is purchased by individual families who don’t grow grapes but who make their
own wine at home.
    As mentioned, among the most famous Georgian wines—whites and reds—are those
made in clay vessels known as qvevri, the smallest of which are large enough that a grown
man can stand inside, and the largest of which can hold 10 tons (9 metric tons) of grapes.
Unlike their historic cousins, the amphorae, qvevri were not used for transportation and
were never moved. Instead, they were buried completely underground, where the stable,
cool temperatures were an asset to fermentation and maturation. Today qvevri are still
used to make and age Georgian wines, but not to transport them. The crushed grapes,
usually along with their stems, are added to the vessels without the addition of commercial
yeasts. (Fermentation takes place as a result of yeasts present on the grape skins and
clinging to the inside walls of the vessels.) Afterward, the qvevri are sealed with wooden
lids and clay or hot beeswax, then left undisturbed for up to six months. During the
enzymatic breakdowns that follow this long contact with skins and stems, juice that was
formerly white is turned into an orange-colored wine, and red juice becomes red wine shot
through with beautiful glints of orange. In 2013, the Ancient Georgian Traditional Qvevri
Wine-Making Method, as it is officially called, was added to the UNESCO Intangible
Cultural Heritage list. Needless to say, the flavor of a wine made in qvevri is amazing—an
attractive resiny-bittersweet amalgam, as if wild herbs, dried orange peel, and the skins of
walnuts were macerated together with a bit of fruit and honey.




             In Georgia, tradition is everything. Here, girls in Tbilisi perform centuries-old dances.
   Finally, a few fascinating facts: Georgians are considered one of the main groups of
native Caucasian peoples, but they do not fit into any of the main ethnic categories of
Europe or Asia. The Georgian language, which belongs to the Kartvelian family of
languages, is neither Indo-European, Turkic, nor Semitic. The present-day native
population traces their history back to autochthonous inhabitants and immigrants who
infiltrated into the South Caucasus from the direction of Anatolia, Turkey, in remote
antiquity.
    Lastly, Georgia is considered to have some of the most exciting food and culinary
traditions in eastern Europe. Among the most prized and most often used foods are
walnuts, garlic, coriander, pomegranates, and marigold flowers. Georgian culinary
traditions center around the supra, or “feast,” that is held on special occasions. The supra
is presided over by the tamada, a sort of spiritual leader and toastmaster, who leads many
emotional and philosophical toasts over large quantities of wine and food consumed over
many hours. The tamada’s role is essential to Georgian culture and it is said that a good
tamada must be eloquent, intelligent, smart, and quick-thinking, with a good sense of
humor in order to prevail when guests try to out-toast him. During most toasts, all men are
expected to stand up and drink wine in silence as they contemplate the ideas and lessons
embedded in the toast the tamada has given.
                                                                         GREECE

GREECE RANKS ELEVENTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. THE GREEKS
DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 7 GALLONS (25 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

The birthplace of western civilization, Greece is in many ways also the birthplace of our
modern wine culture. For the ancient Greeks, wine was a gift to man from the god
Dionysus, an offering of formidable importance since the recipient actually took it into his
own body. Dionysus’s gift established wine (not beer, the more common beverage of
antiquity) as a symbol of worthiness, a luxurious blessing, and the beverage that would
henceforth be inextricably woven into the very fabric of religious celebration. Homer,
Plato, Aristotle, and Hippocrates all wrote of wine’s virtues and its beneficial effects on
thought, health, and creativity. For the ancient Greek man, the intellectual discussions that
arose when drinking wine formed the central core of the symposia, animated get-togethers
from which sprang the beginnings of Western philosophy.
   Bordered by Bulgaria, Macedonia, and Albania to the north and by Turkey to the east,
Greece nonetheless gives the impression of being a country made up as much of water as
of land. Three seas—the Aegean, the Mediterranean, and the Ionian—nudge into the
mountainous landmass, creating a tumble of islands, inlets, bays, and rugged peninsulas.
The dominance and beauty of all this water and the 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) of
coastline are inescapable. No part of Greece, except for a small portion in the northwest, is
more than 50 miles (80 kilometers) from the sea.
    Precisely when winemaking began here is not entirely clear. We know this, however:
Grapevines were probably first domesticated around 8000 B.C. in the so-called Fertile
Triangle—an area that extends from the Taurus Mountains (eastern Turkey) to the
northern Zagros Mountains (western Iran) and the Caucasus Mountains (Republic of
Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan). From this triangle, grapevine cultivation spread to
Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, Palestine, and Jordan. From Palestine, wine was exported to Eygpt,
which according to the world’s leading grapevine geneticist, Dr. José Vouillamoz, author,
with Jancis Robinson and Julia Harding, of Wine Grapes, developed its own extensive and
sophisticated wine industry from 3200 to 2500 B.C. Finally, thanks to Greece’s extensive
trade with Egypt, grape cultivation spread to southern Greece and to the Minoan
civilization on Crete by about 2200 to 2000 B.C. Eventually, of course, wine spread around
the Mediterranean. (The evidence for this migration includes carbonized grape seeds; the
residue of resinated wine found in jars and on stoppers; amphorae stamped with
hieroglyphic signs indicating where the grapes were grown to make the wine inside [the
first wine labels]; and drinking vessels painted with winemaking scenes found in tombs.)
Indeed, it was primarily through trading in wine, and the subsequent social relationships
wine encouraged, that ancient Greece’s influence on everything from ethics to politics
spread throughout the Mediterranean world.
   Many of Greece’s top wine regions border on (or are surrounded by) water. Here, the volcanic Aegean island of
Santorini (imagined by some to be the lost island of Atlantis), is known for crisp white wines that are delicious with the
                                                     local cuisine.


                                  THE QUICK SIP ON GREECE
           THE WINES OF GREECE were among the most important wines in antiquity. Thanks
           to Greece’s extensive trade and colonization, wine became an integral part of the
           cultures of western Europe from their earliest beginnings.
           GREECE’S WINE REGIONS range from inland, cold-climate, mountainous regions in
           northern Macedonia to beautiful Aegean islands, where vines are often mere miles from
           the sea.
           GREECE IS KNOWN for producing a range of wines and styles, from whites like
           assyrtiko and moschofilero to robust reds made from xinomavro and agiorgitiko, to
           lusciously sweet white and red wines made from muscat blanc à petits grains and
           mavrodaphne, respectively.

   The wines drunk in ancient Greece were sometimes flavored—intentionally and
unintentionally—by pine resin, which was used to coat the otherwise porous insides of the
amphorae, or jars, in which wines were stored and transported. Millennia later, the
resinated wine known as retsina is still immensely popular in Greece (see page 653).
During classical times, wines were also sometimes flavored with wildflowers and flower
oils, giving them what Plato considered to be even more positive aromas than they already
possessed. In the ancient Greek view, the proper aromas were necessary for restoring the
body to its natural harmony. The similarity between floral aromas and the aromas of
certain wines raised the reputation of those wines, for floral smells were thought to be
particularly beneficial to the brain and, in addition, were deemed capable of forestalling
intoxication.
                       THE MOST IMPORTANT GREEK WINES
                                              LEADING WINES
           AMYNDEON red, rosé, sparkling
           ARCHARNES red
           CEPHALONIA white
           CRETE white and red
           GOUMENISSA red
           HALKIDIKI white and red
           MANTINIA white and rosé
           MAVRODAPHNE OF PATRAS red (sweet)
           MUSCAT OF PATRAS white (sweet)
           MUSCAT OF SAMOS white (sweet)
           NAOUSSA red
           NEMEA red
           PATRAS white
           RAPSANI red
           RETSINA white
           SANTORINI white

                                              WINES OF NOTE
           VINSÁNTO white (sweet)




On the extremely windy islands of Greece, vines are sometimes trained to grow close to the ground and in a basket shape
                                                 to protect the grapes.

   Intoxication itself was something the Greeks denounced for its harmful effects.
Accordingly, wine was always diluted with water in proportions ranging from two parts
wine and three parts water to one part wine and three parts water. In the eyes of the
Greeks, only barbarians drank wine straight. Eubulus, the Greek poet of the fourth century
B.C. known for his mythological burlesques, summarized the Greek penchant for
moderation when he attributed these words to Dionysus:
Three kraters [bowls used for wine] do I mix for the temperate: one to health, which they
empty first, the second to love and pleasure, the third to sleep. When this bowl is drunk up,
wise guests go home. The fourth bowl is ours no longer, but belongs to hubris, the fifth to
uproar, the sixth to prancing about, the seventh to black eyes, the eighth brings the police,
the ninth belongs to vomiting, and the tenth to insanity and the hurling of furniture.
   Reflecting on the Greek wisdom of taking no more than three drinks, Hugh Johnson,
the esteemed British wine expert, notes that throughout history three drinks have been
considered the model for moderation. Johnson goes on to suggest that from this historic
counsel is derived the wine bottle, which just happens to contain 750 milliliters, or about
three glasses each for two people.
   For an explanation of Greek wine law, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 927.
              THE MODERN GREEK WINE INDUSTRY

For all its hegemony as one of the most important wine producers of antiquity, Greece has
had an arduous climb into the modern world of fine wine. During the Middle Ages, the
country was part of the Byzantine Empire, and the best Greek wines were made by monks
following monastic traditions. But the fall of Byzantium and the subsequent occupation of
Greece by the Ottoman Turks effectively brought an end to Greece’s respected place
among wine producers. The Turks did not formally forbid winemaking for the Christian
population, but the strictures and taxes imposed during nearly four hundred years of
Ottoman domination were severe enough to prevent Greece from developing a significant
wine industry. Greek wine remained the work of peasants whose necessary goal was
subsistence, not sophistication.
    Greece’s wine industry remained largely undeveloped until the twentieth century. As
was true in virtually every other European country, the devastating effects of the insect
phylloxera, which arrived in Greece in the late 1890s, lasted for several decades. This was
followed by two world wars, and then Greece’s own civil war, the combination of which
left the country’s wine industry in ruins. By the 1960s, most Greek wines were still being
sold in bulk, directly from barrels, to buyers who brought their own jugs to fill. It was not
until the mid-1980s, with Greece’s entry into the European Union, that the country’s wine
industry began to shift away from very inexpensive table wines intended for local
consumption, toward wines of finer quality. This meant lowering grape yields
substantially, improving viticultural techniques in the vineyards, employing more modern
equipment, and in many cases, using expensive, small oak barrels.




 The Boutari Winery’s modern tasting room on Crete, one of the most ancient centers of civilization in Europe, dating
                                      from the Minoan period circa 2700 B.C.

   Today there are some six hundred wineries in Greece, and the country’s wine industry
is composed of a handful of well-organized large firms, such as Boutari, D. Kourtakis, and
Tsantali, as well as scores of newer, smaller, quality-oriented, family-run estates. In a
country where land ownership is fragmented, most of these firms, large and small, both
own their own vineyard land and buy grapes from thousands of very small-scale growers.
All are more intent on making fine wine than they’ve been at any other time, and cheap
bulk wine is now left to cooperatives.
            TRANSPORTING WINE IN THE ANCIENT WORLD
Other than goatskin bags, the earliest vessels for transporting wine in the ancient world were amphorae,
terra-cotta jars with two looped handles and, usually, a pointed base. Although the exact date and place
in the eastern Mediterranean where these distinctive jars originated has often been debated, their history
can be traced back to at least 2000 B.C. Around this time, the so-called Canaanite jars that were used to
ship a variety of goods, including wine, were used in Canaan’s extensive trade with pharaonic Egypt. By
the thirteenth century B.C., such vessels were being shipped as far afield as mainland Greece, where
they were found in the tombs of Mycenaean royalty. The hundreds of thousands of amphora fragments
that have been uncovered by anthropologists attest to the enormous volume of commerce in antiquity,
including trade in wine.
   While some small amphorae held about 2½ gallons (10 liters), the jars used in transporting wine were
generally larger, holding 6½ gallons (25 liters) or more and weighing at least 22 pounds (10 kilograms)
when empty. Filled with wine, an amphora would have been heavy, hence the practicality of two handles,
allowing two people to carry the jar. Although the pointed base seems odd, it, too, was pragmatic,
offering a third “handle” when necessary. Such a design was also very functional on ships, where the
pointed bases could be buried deep in sand and the handles of the jars tied together for stability. When
they weren’t being carried, amphorae would be leaned against the wall of a room or placed in special
ring stands to hold them erect.
   Since different Greek city-states produced their own distinctive styles of amphorae, archaeologists
theorize that the various jar shapes would have signaled different kinds of wine in the marketplace. In
addition, before they were fired, the handles of many jars were stamped with information about the type,
the origin, and often the date of the wine that the amphora contained.
   In order to form an airtight seal and thereby prevent bacteria from turning the wine into vinegar, the
narrow necks of ancient wine amphorae were sealed using one of a number of methods. Most
commonly, the mouth of each amphora was filled with a clump of fibrous material, such as straw or
grass, that had been soaked in pine resin, and was then capped with clay. Likewise, because the jars
were porous, the insides of many amphorae were coated with resin in order to prevent or retard
evaporation and oxidation. Since the resinous coating would have been soluble in alcohol, early Greek
wines probably tasted as much of pine pitch as of the wine itself; in this way, they were the forerunners of
modern retsina, the resinated Greek wine that is nothing if not an acquired taste. Sometime later,
certainly by Roman times, lumps of pine pitch were also thrown into wine to help preserve it, or to
disguise the flavor of a wine gone bad.
   From an amphora, wine would be poured into a bronze or pottery bowl called a krater. From the krater
the wine might then be scooped out with a ladle called a kythos into a shallow, two-handled, often
beautifully decorated cup known as a kylix.
The vineyards of Rapsani lie over the foothills of Mount Olympus. Here, bold, tannic, dramatic wines are made from one
                                  of Greece’s most important red grapes—xinomavro.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

In square miles, Greece is only slightly larger than the island of Cuba, and of its total land
area, about 70 percent is mountains and 20 percent islands (making mechanical cultivation
all but impossible). Mountainous regions are used primarily for grazing sheep and goats,
although some vineyards are planted on the more moderate mountain slopes and high
plateaus. The relatively small amount of land that is available for agriculture—some
326,000 acres (131,900 hectares; an amount only modestly greater than the acreage
planted with grapes in Bordeaux)—is widely planted with grapevines and olive trees; both
do well in Greece’s mostly infertile, thin, dry soil.
   Greece’s climate is well adapted for grape growing. Rains come mainly in the winter,
when the vines are dormant. There is bountiful sunlight, augmented by even more light
reflected off the sea, to ripen the grapes fully. If anything, too much sun and heat can be a
problem, for grapes that ripen too quickly often have simple, monochromatic flavors. For
this reason, some vineyards are planted on north-facing slopes to slow down the ripening
process.
   The proximity of Greek vineyards to the sea and cooling maritime breezes is usually an
advantage. But strong sea winds can pose problems. To anyone accustomed to vines that
stand 5 feet (1.5 meters) tall or more (as vines do in California), it’s startling to see the
vineyards on some of the most windswept Greek islands. There, the vines are trained in
the circular kouloura method, close to the ground so that they form what look like wreaths
or shallow baskets. Trained this way, each vine is called a stefáni, or crown. In the center
of the stefáni, protected from the wind, lie the grapes.
   Greece’s peculiar geographic configuration, with its four thousand plus islands, allowed
many different grape varieties to become established. As of this writing, seventy-seven
ancient indigenous varieties have been identified, although others may have gone extinct
over the past century due to the lack of a market for the wines made from them. (Several
Greek winemakers, however, are determined to protect those indigenous varieties that
currently exist from a similar fate.) At the same time, international varieties, such as
chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon, have also been planted in recent years.
                                THE GRAPES OF GREECE
 Greece is home to seventy-seven known indigenous grape varieties. Here are the most important. (And
 don’t forget, pronunciations can be found in the main grape glossary; see page 76.)

                                                WHITE
 ASSYRTIKO: A major grape native to Santorini, in the Aegean Islands. Makes dry wine in a crisp style
 and in a riper, oak-aged style. Also blended into Santorini’s sweet wine, vinsánto.
 MALAGOUSIA: An ancient grape that was saved from extinction in the 1980s. Makes aromatic, full-
 bodied wines with bitter citrus and exotic fruit flavors and aromas.
 MOSCHOFILERO: Despite this grape’s pinkish-red skin, only white wines and occasionally rosés are
 made from it. Aromatic, with a spicy character, moschofilero is the source of the Peloponnesian wine
 Mantinia.
 MUSCAT BLANC Á PETITS GRAINS: Used in the famous, aromatic, sweet and often lightly fortified
 wines muscat of Patras, from Peloponnese, and muscat of Samos, from Samos, an Aegean island.
 ROBOLA: Native to Greece’s Ionian Islands or the Peloponnese, and not related to Italy’s ribolla gialla
 despite the close spelling. Makes complex wines with lemon and mineral characteristics.
 RODITIS: Makes the simple, dry white wine of Patras in Peloponnese.
 SAVATIANO: A widely planted grape, including in the region of Attica, where Athens is located. Most
 retsina is made from savatiano.

                                                 REDS
 AGIORGITIKO: One of Greece’s two most important red varieties, also known as St. George. Makes the
 spicy, dried-cherry-flavored wine Nemea.
 KOTSIFALI: Unique to the island of Crete, this is the main grape of Acharnes, the wines of which are soft
 and full-bodied.
 LIMNIO: Ancient, unique variety mentioned by Aristotle. Spicy, earthy. Native to the island of Lemnos.
 MANDILARIA: Unique to Crete and the Aegean Islands. Fairly tannic; blended in small amounts with
 kotsifali to make the Cretan wine Acharnes, and into Santorini’s sweet wine, vinsánto.
 MAVRODAPHNE: Major grape. The leading variety in mavrodaphne of Patras, a sweet, fortified, aged
 wine made in the Peloponnese.
 NEGOSKA: Soft, low-acid variety blended with xinomavro to make Goumenissa.
 STAVROTO AND KRASSATO: Minor grapes grown on Mount Olympus. Used in Rapsani.
 XINOMAVRO: One of Greece’s two most important red varieties. Makes the powerfully tannic,
 sexy/earthy wine Naoussa and is the leading grape in Goumenissa.

   The country’s most memorable and delicious wines are based about equally on white
and red grape varieties, although approximately 60 percent of Greece’s total wine
production is white. Among the top white grapes are assyrtiko, muscat blanc à petits
grains, robola (not related to the ribolla gialla grape of northern Italy, despite the close
spelling), roditis, savatiano (the grape usually used to make the rustic Greek specialty
retsina), and the popular, wonderfully aromatic grapes malagousia and moschofilero,
which are said to make the best aperitifs in all of Greece. The most important red varieties
include agiorgitiko (also known as St. George), kotsifali, mandelaria, limnio,
mavrodaphne, and the bold xinomavro, whose gastronomically challenged name means
“acid black.”
   Greece is made up of five broad winegrowing areas: northern Greece; mainland
Greece; the Peloponnese and Ionian Islands; the Aegean Islands; and Crete. Each of these
has been well known since antiquity, and each contains numerous important subregions.
(One side note before we explore these regions. Greek place names can have multiple
spellings, due to the lack of universal rules for converting from the phonetically based
Greek alphabet into English, with its Roman alphabet. I have used the most common
English spellings for the places mentioned below, but on a wine label, you might find a
different spelling, or even Greek itself, of course.)




  In Greece, every aspect of viticulture is done by hand, as it has been for centuries. The country’s steep, undulating
              terrain and 2,500 miles (4,000 kilometers) of coastline effectively prohibit mechanization.

   Northern Greece, along the northern coast of the Aegean Sea and far inland, comprises
the large regions known as Macedonia, Thrace, and Epirus. Within these are several
smaller wine regions, among them: Goumenissa, Naoussa, Amyndeon, Rapsani, and
Halkidiki; the latter is a stunning peninsula that thrusts out into the Aegean like three
fingers.
   Among northern Greece’s white wines, the rare, exotic, and deliciously bitter-citrus-
tasting grape malagousia (which was rescued from extinction in the 1990s thanks to the
efforts of Vangelis Gerovassiliou) thrives here, especially in Macedonia. Xinomavro, and
the dark, brooding, very tannic reds it often makes, are also a specialty of northern Greece,
especially in Naoussa, Goumenissa, Rapsani, and the far-inland, high-altitude region of
Amyndeon. I often think of xinomavro—one of the few grapes that is high in both acid
and tannin—as Greece’s Barolo, and like Barolo, wines made from xinomavro resist
oxidation and can take years to soften and come around. In Rapsani, xinomavro is blended
with two other minor red grapes, stavroto and krassato, grown on the foothills of Mount
Olympus, Greece’s highest mountain. Krassato means “wine colored,” a description used
frequently in antiquity, including by Homer, who, in the Odyssey, describes Odysseus’s
journey on the “wine-dark sea.” Finally, in Halkidiki, cabernet sauvignon and syrah have
been especially successful. The Carras family, of Domaine Porto Carras, helped pioneer
this region with the assistance of famous French enologist Émile Peynaud.




   Mainland Greece encompasses two distinctly different areas—the northern,
mountainous part near Thessalia (Thessaly), and the flatter plains, where the main wine
region is Attiki (Attica). Most of the grapes here go into simple table wines, and this is the
leading home of the native grape savatiano, the most cultivated wine-producing variety in
Greece and the grape used for retsina.
                                                 RETSINA
 Few visitors to Greece escape without either falling in love with or learning to abhor retsina, the pungent,
 pine-resin-flavored wine, the drinking of which is virtually a baptismal right in Greek tavernas. Today,
 retsina (which has protected appellation status in Greece) accounts for an impressive 15 percent of
 Greece’s total production of table wine. Resinated wines have a long history in Greece; traces of pine
 resin have been found in Greek wine amphorae dating back to the thirteenth century B.C. Modern retsina
 can be made anywhere in the country, although most of it is made in Attica, the region that surrounds
 Athens. While many different white grape varieties can be used, and are, the most common variety is
 savatiano, a relatively neutral white grape. Small amounts of resin from the Aleppo pine are added to
 savatiano grape juice as it ferments, imparting retsina’s inimitable piney flavor and unmistakable
 turpentine-like aroma. Among non-Greeks, retsina is often the subject of good-natured jokes. But a
 number of Greeks take the unique wine quite seriously, suggesting that it is the perfect accompaniment
 to many Greek meze (small dishes of appetizers served like Spanish tapas).

    The southernmost region of the Greek mainland is the peninsula known as the
Peloponnese, which in fact is so completely surrounded by water that, save for the 4-mile-
wide (6.4-kilometer) and 20-mile-long (32-kilometer) Isthmus of Corinth, it would be a
large island. The vineyards of the Peloponnese and the Ionian Islands that surround it are
concentrated in the more mountainous areas, either on rugged plateaus or in valleys
wedged in between the mountain massifs. The three most important wine regions here are
Nemea, Mantinia, and Patras. The wines of Nemea, thought to have been the palace wines
of Agamemnon, are made from the highly regarded agiorgitiko, a red grape. Nemea, firm
and structured, can have a fascinating, spicy, and peppery flavor. The wine from Mantinia
is usually a fantastic, dry, spicy, aromatic white, made from the pink-skinned grape
moschofilero. And Patras is home to three different wines. In its most straightforward
version, Patras is just a simple, dry white wine made from the roditis grape. More unusual
and interesting is muscat of Patras, made from muscat blanc à petits grains, a viscous
dessert wine that is sometimes fortified, sometimes not. Most idiosyncratic of all is
mavrodaphne of Patras, made (in the best cases) 100 percent from mavrodaphne grapes
(the word mavrodaphne means “black laurel”). Cheaper versions of mavrodaphne of
Patras include black Corinth grapes, which are better known as the source of dried
currants. Amber to mahogany colored, sweet, thick, fortified, complex, and slightly
oxidized, mavrodaphne of Patras is aged for several years in barrels in a manner somewhat
like tawny Port. Traditionally, Greeks drink mavrodaphne of Patras in the afternoon with a
small plate of figs or oranges (although it is also stunning with chocolate). It is the wine
most often used in Greek Orthodox churches during Holy Communion.

              HUNTING DOWN THE HOME OF EASTER EGGS
    Devouring a handful of milk chocolate Easter eggs or hunting around the backyard for plastic ones are
    two behaviors that are, well, all Greek to the Greeks. In Greece, where the practice of dyeing eggs for
    Easter originated, the custom continues to be a deeply felt religious ritual. The eggs (real ones, needless
    to say) are dyed on Holy Thursday (the Thursday preceding Easter Sunday) and are eaten after midnight
    mass on Holy Saturday as a way of breaking the Lenten fast. In Greece, Easter eggs are always dyed a
    deep red, symbolizing the blood of Christ, while the egg itself represents life and regeneration. In some
    parts of northern Greece, the eggs are not just dyed, they are also hand painted with figures, often of
    birds—a symbol of Christ’s resurrection from the dead.

   The Aegean Islands are fascinating, small, enclavelike wine regions unto themselves.
Extremely windy, with barren soils and minimal water, the islands require specialized
forms of viticulture that have been used for millennia. In the northern Aegean, on islands
such as Lemnos and Samos, muscat varieties—especially muscat blanc à petits grains—
dominate. In particular, Samos, off the coast of Turkey, is well known for muscat of
Samos, which can be aromatic and dry or a sweet, apricotish, lightly fortified wine. In the
southern Aegean, on islands such as Rhodes and Santorini, the main varieties are the white
assyrtiko, athiri, and monemvasia and the red variety of mandilaria.
   Of all of these islands, the one that, in the modern era, has remained famous for wine is
Santorini, considered by some Greeks to be the legendary Atlantis. A spectacular, almost
surreal volcanic island, Santorini is a giant blackened crater poised between the
shockingly blue sky and the equally blue sea, each of which can seem indistinguishable
from the other. The soil that makes up many vineyards on the island is little more than
eerie-looking, pockmarked, jet black lava rocks, the remnants of multiple ancient volcanic
eruptions. One of these, which occurred sometime between 1627 and 1600 B.C., was one of
the largest volcanic events on earth in recorded history, and was so catastrophic that it is
thought to have destroyed the Minoan civilization on the nearby island of Crete.
   Santorini’s vineyards may be among the oldest under continuous cultivation in the
world. The age of the vines themselves is difficult to specify because of the way the vines
are grown and pruned. To protect the grapes from the sharp sun and the extreme winds,
the vines are trained low to the ground, forming what look like wreaths or baskets—a
method known as kouloura (meaning “coil”). After many years of such training, the
nutrients must pass through the roots and several yards/meters of vine to finally reach the
grapes, which greatly affects the yields of these old vines. Eventually the yields become so
low that the “basket” is cut completely off at the root of the plant, near the surface of the
soil. This is generally done when the vines approach seventy-five years of age. A new
plant eventually sprouts from a dormant eye on the old roots, and a new basket will be
formed that produces a harvest within two to three years. From historical records kept by
Greek vintners, it’s known that this procedure has been performed at least four or five
times over the past few centuries, making some of the original roots hundreds of years old.
So, how old are the vines? In Santorini it depends on whether you are speaking of the
scion (the above-ground part of the vine) or the roots themselves.
    Assyrtiko and mandilaria grapes drying on mats in the sun. Once fermented, they will become Greek vinsánto.

   Traditionally, most wines from Santorini were crisp, dry whites made from assyrtiko
grapes. Their simple purity and freshness were perfectly suited to the island’s simple,
seafood-based cooking. In recent years, however, more and more of these have been made
in a riper style and made or aged in oak. These wines have gained weight and broadness
on the palate, but some have lost what, to me, was their traditional appeal.
   The island is also famous for vinsánto, a sweet dessert wine reminiscent of the Tuscan
dessert wine vin santo. (But while vin santo means “holy wine,” vinsánto—without the
space—is a contraction of wine [vin] from Santorini.) Both are made from grapes that
have been dried to concentrate their sugar. In the case of Santorini vinsánto, assyrtiko and
mandilaria grapes are first spread out on mats to dry in the sun for one to two weeks.
When they achieve a state referred to as half-baked, the grapes are fermented. Afterward,
the wine is aged in barrel for a decade, giving it a mellow, rich flavor.
   And, finally, the island of Crete, the largest of all the Greek islands, was one of the first
places in the world to develop a systematic approach to grape growing and winemaking,
and the varieties that grow there even today are unique to the island. Kotsifali (soft and
full-bodied) and mandilaria (more structured), for example, are the two rare grapes that are
blended together to make the famous red wines of Archarnes, the most important wine
region on the island.
On Crete, a restored entrance to Knossos, considered Europe’s oldest city.
                         THE FOODS OF GREECE

If the French can’t wait to impress you with their cooking and the Italians want to romance
you with theirs, the Greeks have decided to keep their cuisine—the real stuff, that is—
mostly a secret. It’s a shame, for the country can legitimately boast one of the most
exciting (and healthful) cuisines in Europe. Greece’s mountainous, arid terrain has always
prohibited large-scale agriculture, and most good products—from cheeses and yogurts to
olives and vegetables—are still made largely on an artisanal basis. Even today, working
women and men who live in Greek cities often return to their families’ villages in the fall
to help with the olive and grape harvests and to put up fruits and vegetables.
   Greek cuisine is also intrinsically tied to religion. In no other country that I know of is
fasting (especially during Lent and Advent) still so much a part of contemporary life. For
the typical Greek, fasting and feasting, frugality and wealth, are irrevocably interwoven.
Greek cuisine encompasses both utterly humble dishes based on little more than
vegetables and olive oil, and extravagant dishes served at Easter and Christmas, including
a whole repertoire of elaborate, rich breads baked for holidays.
    A Greek meal is adamantly languorous. Greeks do not plunge straightaway into a main
course but rather begin with a deeply ingrained ritual known as the meze (the name refers
to both the concept and the foods that make it up). A meze is a nugget of food, smaller
than an American appetizer, more like a tapa in Spain. Typically many different mezedes
are offered for the express purpose of accompanying wine or ouzo, the well-loved local
anise-flavored liqueur. (The Greeks, who rarely drink without eating something, all seem
to have an opinion on which mezedes are krasomezedes, “those that go better with
wine”—krasi—and which are ouzomezedes, “those that go better with ouzo.”) There
might be bite-size golden triangles of crisp phyllo stuffed with cheese (tyropittakia) or
small, mint-and-anise-flavored lamb meatballs (keftedes). Always, there’s a rich dip like
tzatziki, a tangy jolt of thick yogurt, garlic, dill, and cucumbers; taramasalata, a creamy
swirl of carp roe, olive oil, and lemon; or my favorite, skordalia, a bracing puree of
potatoes, olive oil, wine vinegar, and, depending on the cook, enough garlic to beat aioli at
its own game. Dolmadakia, one of the most traditional mezedes (this should win over just
about every wine lover) is made from tender grape leaves, usually picked in the spring and
then rolled and stuffed with lemony, dill-scented rice.
   There is a seemingly infinite number of mezedes, but the very simplest is one that no
Greek would omit: olives. Since the days when it was the cradle of Western civilization,
Greece has been renowned for the diversity and abundance of its olives, virtually all of
which are stronger in flavor and more pungent in aroma than French or Italian olives,
because of the low-tech, centuries-old ways in which they are still picked and cured.
    The meze completed, Greeks may still not yet delve into the main meal, for next comes
pitta (assuming that tiny pittas weren’t served as mezedes). A pitta is not the same as the
flatish pocket bread we know as pita but rather is a savory pie with a phyllo crust. The best
known is spanakopita, stuffed with spinach, but there are also melitzanopitta—eggplant,
cheese, and walnuts flavored with ouzo and oregano and wrapped up in a phyllo crust—
and, perhaps closest to the Greek heart, hortopitta—a phyllo pie filled with wild greens,
for which women forage around their villages. Everything from dandelion greens and
sorrel to fennel and lemon balm might be included, making it difficult to put your finger
on a hortopitta’s flavor, although all Greeks instantly recognize their mother’s version.
The most sensational (and sensuous) pitta I ever had was made with homemade phyllo
dough stuffed with a creamy puree of a type of pumpkin that grows in the mountains of
northern Greece.
   Phyllo, for its part, is inescapable. Today, the ultrathin dough that turns golden, crisp,
and flaky when baked is almost uniformly made commercially in Greece and sold in
supermarkets. But there are women—usually old women in remote villages—who
continue to make phyllo by hand, rolling the dough out to a seemingly impossible thinness
using broom-handle-thin rolling pins that are several feet/meters long.
   The long stretches of poverty that Greeks have experienced throughout their history
make this a country where vegetables, salads, and legumes are prized, and where they
often constitute the main part of the meal. Markets are piled high with shiny eggplants,
tomatoes, cucumbers, zucchini, leeks, cauliflowers, fennel, and carrots, plus dozens of
types of wild and cultivated greens. Vegetables like leeks and zucchini are often stuffed
with a lemony rice mixture emboldened by fresh mint and dill. But they are also cooked as
ragouts or baked and then laced with Greece’s one famous and nearly ubiquitous sauce,
avgolemono, a delicate, deep yellow sauce made with egg, lemon juice, and broth. When
the broth is chicken, the sauce can become the basis for kotosoupa avgolemono—chicken
soup.




 Exciting and healthful, traditional Greek cuisine relies on artisanal products—mostly vegetables, fruits, and legumes.
                              But when meat is in order, lamb—spit-roasted—is a favorite.

    As for salads, the custom of ending a meal with a refreshing green salad probably
originated in ancient Greece (sorry, France), but today, salads are more commonly served
first. None is better known than the classic Greek salad, a dish that ranges from awesome
to appalling. Done right, it has juicy, vine-ripened tomatoes, cucumber that is almost
crunchy it’s so crisp, tangy fresh feta cheese, rich briny kalamata olives, good anchovies,
snappy green peppers, pungent oregano, and a dressing of piquant, green-gold extra virgin
olive oil, with a splash of spunky red wine vinegar. Lettuce is optional.
   Greece’s thousands of miles of coastline and numerous islands make it a logical haven
for seafood. Sitting in a no-frills harborfront taverna, you can grow faint smelling all the
immaculately fresh, delicious whole grilled fish being whisked out of the kitchen. Greece
has dozens upon dozens of different fish, and besides being grilled, they are baked in salt,
baked in grape leaves, baked with feta cheese, fried in olive oil, and simmered in countless
stews that recall bouillabaisse. But the seafood that truly epitomizes Greece is the world’s
most sumptuous cephalopods—octopus and squid (htapothi and kalamaria). In particular,
the delicate, oceanic flavor of salt-crusted octopus grilled over hot coals, then dressed with
lemon and olive oil, is incomparable.




         The harbor and fortress on the island of Rhodes, where the rare red grape mandilaria is grown.

   Asked to name the one food they most associate with Greece, many people would
name lamb, and lamb is indeed revered by the Greeks. The biggest testament to this is at
Easter, when all over Greece it is traditional to serve a whole, spit-roasted lamb. As it
cooks, the lamb is basted using rosemary branches dipped in olive oil. Not that Easter is
lamb’s fifteen minutes of fame. The meat is everywhere—in tavernas it shows up as
souvlaki, chunks of leg of lamb skewered and grilled until they’re black and crusty on the
outside and juicy within; or baked with preserved lemons in clay; in spicy stews with
mint, rice, raisins, and walnuts; and in casseroles with honey (the thyme-scented honey of
Crete is renowned), raisins, cinnamon, vinegar, and capers. But above all, there is
moussaka, ground lamb layered with eggplant, tomatoes, cinnamon, and feta, topped with
béchamel sauce, and baked in clay pots.
   Finally there are sweets. Greeks may be able to give up meat for long periods of time,
but when it comes to sweets, forget it. The Greek passion for sweet things could give you
a toothache just thinking about it. When guests arrive unexpectedly, they are often served
syrupy preserves meant to be eaten with a spoon and made from quince, walnuts,
pistachios, bergamot (the citrus that flavors Earl Grey tea), figs, or oranges. There are all
manner of ultra-sweet phyllo-based pastries soaked with honey—baklava, for example—
plus thiples, fried pieces of dough dipped in honey and nuts, which are supposed to
appease any malicious spirits lingering around the household. Lest anyone feel unsatisfied,
most Greek homes also have an ample supply of cookies, tarts, and biscuits, often made
with sesame seeds, almonds, or walnuts and—what else?—honey.

                            WHEN YOU VISIT… GREECE
         CONSISTENT WITH ITS REPUTATION as a generous and welcoming destination for
         tourists, Greece offers many opportunities for visiting wine lovers. Among the best are
         two programs, the Wine Roads of Northern Greece and the Wine Roads of
         Peloponnese. Each of these outlines specific routes, with directions to wineries, plus
         information on local food specialties, restaurants, archaeological sites, monasteries,
         museums, and churches.
                                  The Greek Wines to Know
                                               SPARKLING




                                                  KARANIKA

                          BRUT | CUVÉE SPÉCIALE | AMYNDEON, MACEDONIA
                                                100% xinomavro
Karanika, made by the husband-and-wife team of Laurens Hartman and Annette van Kampen, is not only the best
sparkling wine in Greece, but a stunning example of an artisanal sparkling wine made anywhere in the world from
grapes other than chardonnay and pinot noir. And while the red grape xinomavro may seem a very surprising choice
(it’s boldly tannic and acidic), the grape’s naturally high acidity is pitch perfect for a good sparkler. The wine—
made according to the traditional (Champagne) method—is distinctive and fresh, with a frothy, creamy mousse
that’s delicious. Amyndeon (named after the grandfather of Alexander the Great) is an area in the far northwest of
Greece, toward the border with Albania. Far inland and blocked off from the Aegean Sea by mountains, it has the
coolest climate in Greece.

                                                  WHITES
                                                    TSELEPOS

                                MOSCHOFILERO | MANTINIA, PELOPONNESE
                                                 100% moschofilero
Tselepos’s moschofilero has a bright, aromatic richness that seems evocative of the Peloponnese landscape itself.
With its wonderful, super-fruity lemon character and hints of spicy pepperiness, it’s a tight, refreshing wine ready to
spring open at the merest suggestion of an interesting food companion. (Grilled octopus salad? Pot stickers?)
Giannis Tselepos studied wine at the University of Dijon, in Burgundy, and worked for several Burgundian
domaines before starting his own winery in southern Greece with his wife, Amalia, in 1989.
                                         DOMAINE GEROVASSILIOU

                                         MALAGOUSIA | MACEDONIA
                                                 100% malagousia
The best Greek whites carry you away with them to a sunny, wild-herb-scattered, windswept ancient landscape, and
no wine does that better than Gerovassiliou’s Malagousia, based on the ancient native grape malagousia, which was
saved from extinction in the 1980s, in part due to the efforts of Vangelis Gerovassiliou. The wine opens with a rush
of exotic lemon, bergamot, pear, and mango aromas and flavors, and then takes on a delicious, resiny herb quality.
Tight, pristine, and focused, it’s mouthfilling and rich. Domaine Gerovassiliou, about 15 miles (24 kilometers)
southeast of the ancient city of Thessaloniki, in Macedonia, makes wines that span a huge creative range—from
malagousia to viognier and from syrah to limnio.
                                                   GENTILINI

                                  ASPRO | CEPHALONIA, IONIAN ISLANDS
                                 40% tsaoussi, 30% sauvignon blanc, 30% muscat
Aspro (the name means “white” in Greek) tastes like an island wine—it’s one big burst of freshness, as if the blue
ocean and fresh fruit were somehow melded together. With its beautiful notes of green fig (that’s the sauvignon
blanc talking) and the touches of exotic fruitiness (muscat), Aspro is the kind of wine you’d find in a seaside
taverna in Greece. As for tsaoussi, this Greek variety, with its light melon and peach flavors, is thought to have
originated on Cephalonia (Kefaloniá in Greek), the largest of the Ionian Islands. (Cephalonia was the island in the
bestselling novel Captain Corelli’s Mandolin, by the English author Louis de Bernières.)
                                             KTIMA BIBLIA CHORA

                                       OVILOS | PANGEON, MACEDONIA
                                            50% assyrtiko, 50% sémillon
Located on the slopes of Mount Pangeon, in Macedonia, the Ktima (which means “estate”) Biblia Chora was
founded by two famous Greek enologists, Claus Tsaktsarlis and Vangelis Gerovassiliou. Their top wines are
stunningly creative. Ovilos, for example, combines the freshness of assyrtiko with the broad, honied character of
sémillon (who knew there was a single sémillon vine in Greece?), and the result is a sensational wine that seems
like the lost cousin of white Bordeaux. With its beautiful sweeping flavors of dried wild herbs, chamomile, roasted
nuts, sea salt, cardamom, and the classic candle wax character of sémillon, Ovilos is both rich and sophisticated.
The name Ovilos is a reference to the ancient people of the region and their refusal to pay a tax, or obulus (ancient
silver coin), in order to plant vineyards on the land. Over centuries, this refusal of an obulus came to be known as
ovilos.
                                                  HIGH PEAKS

                           DRY MUSCAT OF SAMOS | SAMOS, AEGEAN ISLANDS
                                         100% muscat blanc à petits grains
For several centuries, the mountainous island of Samos, just a little over a mile (1.6 kilometers) off the coast of
Turkey, has been one of the most famous islands in the Aegean. The word samos is thought to come from the
Phoenician word for heights. Here, muscat grapes, planted in rocky, terraced vineyards rising to 2,500 feet (760
meters) in altitude, make wines that are stunningly aromatic and redolent of flowers and fruits. While some muscat
of Samos wines are sweet and fortified, High Peaks (Psilés Korfés in Greek) is a fascinating dry wine with edgy
marmalade-like bitterness plus exotic notes of lychee, ginger, and kumquat, as well as the dry, resiny shrub
character that adds a special “Mediterranean island” aroma and flavor. High Peaks is one of the top wines of the
Union of Viticultural Cooperatives of Samos.
                                                       ROSÉ
                                                    KIR-YIANNI




                              AKAKIES | DRY ROSÉ | AMYNDEON, MACEDONIA
                                                   100% xinomavro
The bright red/blue color of a cherry Popsicle, Kir-Yianni’s dry rosé is ravishingly fresh, with a sophisticated, slight
edge of bitterness. Think juicy strawberries splashed with Campari. You can immediately imagine yourself on some
sun-drenched Greek island overlooking the cobalt blue Mediterranean and drinking this ice-cold. While Greece has
a way to go to challenge southern France as the European capital of dry rosé, this wine is poised for the mission,
and indeed, Amyndeon is the only Greek appellation approved for rosé wines. Akakies is made in part by skin
contact, and in part by the saignée or “bleeding” method, giving it a deep concentration. The name Akakies means
“acacia trees” in Greek and refers to the acacia trees with their bright pink flowers that line the road from the town
of Amyndeon to the small village of Agios Panteleimon, where the vineyards and the winery are located.

                                                       REDS
                                              DOMAINE MERCOURI

                                            LENTRINI, PELOPONNESE
                                           85% refosco, 15% mavrodaphne
Domaine Mercouri’s simple but delicious red has a cocoa-y, dusty character that’s just right for a country wine.
Although refosco is rare in Greece, family-owned Domaine Mercouri is well known for pioneering the variety.
Indeed, after the estate was founded in 1864, Theodoros Mercouri brought back refosco cuttings from northern
Italy, where he had business dealings. Like refosco from the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region of Italy, this has a sleek
body and an attractive salty/spicy character. Here, it’s blended with mavrodaphne, which adds a bitter cherry lift.




                                                    KIR-YIANNI

                                      RAMNISTA | NAOUSSA, MACEDONIA
                                                   100% xinomavro
Xinomavro is in full form in Ramnista, the Naoussa wine from Kir-Yianni. (In local dialect, ramnista means “down
there.” It’s also the name of the area within Naoussa where the grapes for this wine were grown.) For starters,
there’s an onslaught of tannin and acid that lash around on the palate like leather straps. But with some air (actually,
a lot of air), Ramnista’s firmness begins to yield, and the wine reveals a sexy, earthy aroma and powerful flavors of
bitter cherries, dark chocolate, and espresso. Never for the faint of heart, xinomavro benefits from decanting to
open it up, and from roast lamb to mollify its impact. Yiannis Boutari, of the large Boutari wine company, founded
Kir-Yianni in 1997 as a small estate devoted to super-premium wines.
                                                 DRIOPI ESTATE

                                      RESERVE | NEMEA, PELOPONNESE
                                                  100% agiorgitiko
If you have ever walked into an old men’s club, you know this smell: a comingling of old leather, old books, old
cigars, old coffee, even old men. It’s a very attractive aroma, and Domaine Driopi’s Nemea exudes it. But then
come the juicy, fruity, and bitter flavors—something like raspberries soaked in Campari—that give this wine its
delicious “center.” Together, the two ideas combine to create a sophisticated red wine. Driopi is the brainchild of
Giannis Tselepos, founder of Tselopos Estate in Peloponnese. The winery was opened in 2004 and focuses solely
on agiorgitiko.
                                                GAIA ESTATE

                                           NEMEA, PELOPONNESE
                                                100% agiorgitiko
GAIA Wines was founded in 1994 by Yiannis Paraskevopoulos, an agriculturalist and PhD in enology from the
University of Bordeaux, and Leon Karatsalos, also an agriculturalist. The two decided to work with indigenous
Greek varieties and establish two wineries, one to makes wines from Santorini, and the other to make Nemea wines
from agiorgitiko, in the Peloponnese. GAIA’s agiorgitiko is more complex than most—a sleek, firm wine with
slightly spicy, wild chaparral aromas and then flavors of raspberries, violets, minerals, and sea salt that come
crashing onto the palate in a wonderful combination of severity and sensuality.




                                                   BOUTARI

                         GRANDE RESERVE NAOUSSA | NAOUSSA, MACEDONIA
                                                100% xinomavro
As I’ve noted in this chapter, it isn’t easy to fall in love with xinomavro, but certain wines—such as Boutari’s
Grande Reserve Naoussa—are captivating for their sheer force and impact. (Wine drinkers who eschew the use of
the word masculine to describe wine should try this.) And there’s more than just power here. I love the wine’s
cherry/anise/salty character and the way it exudes numerous types of bitterness—from strong espresso to wild herbs
to something like the medicinal-tasting bitterness of Fernet Branca. At the table, carnivores will be happy.
                                             THE UNITED STATES

    CALIFORNIA | WASHINGTON STATE | OREGON | NEW YORK STATE |
                        TEXAS | VIRGINIA
 ARIZONA   | MISSOURI | NEW MEXICO | PENNSYLVANIA | IDAHO | MICHIGAN | COLORADO | NEW
                                           JERSEY
THE UNITED STATES RANKS FOURTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE.
AMERICANS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 3 GALLONS (12 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

It’s often said that the United States possesses a pioneering spirit, a vestige of its
beginnings. Nowhere is that pioneering spirit more alive than in the world of wine. The
United States now ranks fourth worldwide in wine production; wine is made in every U.S.
state; and year after year, the number of new producers continues to climb—as of a recent
survey, there were nearly 8,400 wineries in the country.
    Amazingly, the United States is now the world’s largest wine-consuming market,
having taken the title from France in 2010. More than 780 million gallons (29.5 million
hectoliters) of wine is drunk in the U.S. each year, but this impressive amount is, in fact,
the result of the country’s large population. By per capita consumption, the U.S. ranks not
first, but fifty-seventh. Indeed, more than 40 percent of all American adults don’t drink
alcohol in any form, principally for religious reasons. (Such abstinence has few parallels
in the western world. Germany, for example, has a 5 percent abstinence rate, France, a
little more than 6 percent, and the U.K., 12 percent.) Wine, alas, remains the passion of
only a small percentage of Americans. As of 2012, just 25 percent of adult Americans
consumed 93 percent of the wine sold in the United States.
   But changes have begun to take place. Since the mid-1990s, shifting lifestyles and
mounting evidence of wine’s health benefits caused wine consumption to rise. The most
significant evidence of that shift: By 2011, for the first time in U.S. history, among people
who drank alcohol, wine slightly edged out beer as the preferred alcoholic beverage.
                                       EXPLOSIVE GROWTH
 The number of wineries in the United States has increased dramatically. This is very clear when, for the leading
 wine-producing states, the number of wineries in 1960 is compared to that in 2012.


   STATE                                        1960                               2012


   California                                   256                                3,406


   Washington State                             15                                 786


   Oregon                                       0                                  441


   New York State                               15                                 366


   Texas                                        1                                  283


   Virginia                                     0                                  250


   Finally, for most wine drinkers, California is the driving force behind wine in the
United States (and indeed, more than 90 percent of all American wine is produced there).
But Oregon and Washington State now make wines of national renown, and New York
State and Virginia are producing some of the best wines they ever have in their long
histories. Plus, some surprisingly good wines come from places as far-flung as Texas.
We’ll take a good look at all of these and glance at several even more unexpected
locations. For an explanation of the United States’ wine laws, see the Appendix on Wine
Laws, pages 927–928.
Gainey Vineyards’ “Evan’s Ranch” is nestled in the cool western appellation known as the Sta. Rita Hills—a two-hour
           drive along the Pacific Coast north of Los Angeles, and perfect for pinot noir and chardonnay.
              THE UNITED STATES: AN OVERVIEW

The United States is a vast country—the fourth largest in the world, spread over more than
3.5 million square miles (9 million square kilometers). Given the country’s size, it comes
as little surprise that the history of viticulture in the United States is really two separate
histories, each independent of the other and centered on a separate coast.
    On the East Coast, the first attempts at producing wine from European grapes occurred
in the early decades of the seventeenth century. Most ended in failure, including the
multiple efforts of third president Thomas Jefferson, who was convinced that Virginia
possessed the perfect environment for making fine wine. For Jefferson and others it was
especially frustrating to note that wild American vines grew in hearty profusion all around
the colonies. Unfortunately, the wine made from these native vines tasted pretty odd (at
least to those who had developed a European palate). And so wave after wave of
immigrants persisted in bringing European vines with them to the East Coast. And those
European vines, for their part, continued to die of various diseases and pests, including the
most virulent pest of all, and one the immigrants could not have known about—phylloxera
(see page 30).
   Undeterred by such setbacks, settlers in New York and Virginia soon began to
reexamine native grapes, hoping to come up with ways of making the wine from them
taste better. By crossing certain native grapes with others, they succeeded. Later these
crosses were joined by French-American hybrid grapes, created mostly by French
scientists and quickly adopted in the United States. By the time of the Civil War, the East
Coast had a well-established, if small, wine industry based primarily on native grape
varieties, crosses, and hybrids.

                                  AMERICA THINKS BIG
         The largest winery in the United States, Gallo, is also the largest winery in the world.
         According to winemaker Gina Gallo, the family-owned company produces 75 million
         cases a year—for comparison’s sake, this is somewhat more wine than the entire
         country of Portugal produces.
            The Gallo company beginnings, however, could not have been more humble. In
         1933, in the aftermath of the Depression and Prohibition, Ernest and Julio Gallo, aged
         twenty-four and twenty-three, respectively, decided to start a winery in the then dusty
         farm town of Modesto, in California’s Central Valley. There were, they realized, a few
         problems with their plan. The brothers had no experience with winemaking, no
         equipment, no vineyards, no winemaker, and no money.
            But by reading pamphlets on wine-making in the Modesto public library, by borrowing
         equipment, and by taking out loans to buy grapes, Ernest and Julio managed to make
         their first batch of wine. Today, at any given moment, more people in the United States
         are drinking a Gallo wine or one of its sixty sister brands, than any other brand. And
         while most of those wines will be among Gallo’s numerous inexpensive wines, the
         company also makes many fine wines, most of which come from grapes grown in
         Sonoma County.
 “Wine is one of the most civilized things in the world and one of the natural
 things of the world that has been brought to the greatest perfection, and it
 offers a greater range for enjoyment and appreciation than, possibly, any other
 purely sensory thing.”
                                                              — ERNEST HEMINGWAY,
                                                                  Death in the Afternoon


                                    VIRGINIA DARE
Thought to be the oldest branded wine in the United States (dating from circa 1835), Virginia Dare was
named after the first child born of English parents in America. The white Virginia Dare was originally
called Minnehaha; the red, Pocahontas. The wine was made from scuppernong, a variety of native grapes
that were found growing off the coast of Virginia and North Carolina. (The grapes are named after the
Scuppernong River). During Prohibition, the company that made Virginia Dare stopped making wine and
instead manufactured flavorings (which depend on alcohol during extraction). Today, Virginia Dare is a
Brooklyn, New York–based flavor and extract company.
                  AMERICA’S WINE CULTURE—PROHIBITED
 More than any other political event in the history of the United States, the nearly fourteen-year period
 called Prohibition shaped America’s current drinking patterns. Prohibition quashed the budding wine
 culture, and the U.S. became, almost overnight, a society that found pleasure and solace in hard liquor.
 The Eighteenth Amendment’s constitutional ban on the manufacture, sale, and transport of all beverages
 containing alcohol officially took effect January 16, 1920 (although various Prohibition laws were on the
 books of individual states earlier), and ended December 5, 1933. It was enforced by a set of rules known
 as the Volstead Act, which was named after its sponsoring Minnesota congressman, Andrew J. Volstead.
    At the time the law was enacted, California had roughly the same number of wineries it would have
 some seventy years later—slightly more than seven hundred. By the end of Prohibition, only 140
 wineries remained. Most were destitute, having barely survived by making sacramental and kosher wine
 for priests, ministers, and rabbis (a rash of new religious groups had also formed) as well as making
 nonprescription medicinal wine “tonics” (blends of wine, salt, and beef broth) for the infirm and
 convalescent (whose numbers had greatly increased).
    The decades before Prohibition had been a golden age for wine in the United States. Founded by
 ambitious German, Swiss, and Italian immigrants, the wine industry had grown rapidly, unfettered by
 European laws and land rights. American wine had won awards in dozens of international competitions,
 including the prestigious Paris Exhibition of 1900. A vibrant culture of wine with food—not unlike Europe’s
 —was just beginning to take hold. But the Prohibitionists had been gaining power for a decade, led, in
 many cases, by women empowered by their newfound right to vote. In the face of growing antagonism,
 vintners remained surprisingly optimistic. Surely wine, the beverage of the Bible and Thomas Jefferson,
 would be exempt, they rationalized. After all, weren’t immoral saloons and public drunkenness—and not
 the moderate consumption of wine with meals—the Prohibitionists’ real targets? In what can only be
 described as naïveté or denial, even after Prohibition was signed into law, many winemakers believed it
 would be suspended so that the 1920 crop could be harvested. To the architects of Prohibition, of course,
 alcohol was alcohol.
    Ironically, during this time grape production and home winemaking increased. A veiled provision in the
 Volstead Act allowed citizens to make up to 200 gallons annually of nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices.
 Nonintoxicating, however, was never actually defined. Brokers and wineries immediately began shipping
 crates of grapes, grape concentrates (the most famous one, called Vine-Glo, came in eight varieties),
 and even compressed grape “bricks” to home wine-makers around the country. Along with the bricks
 came the convenient admonition: “Warning. Do not place this brick in a one gallon crock, add sugar and
 water, cover, and let stand for seven days or else an illegal alcoholic beverage will result.”
    Meanwhile, the bootlegging of powerful high-proof spirits became a thriving industry, and the local
 drinking establishment formed a new order for what and how people drank. Speakeasy was the name
 given to the raucous illegal saloons that sprung up during Prohibition. The word derived from the English
 underworld term “speak softly shop”—a smuggler’s house where one could buy cheap liquor. By the end
 of Prohibition, it was clear that the social experiment in forced abstinence had failed. New York at the
 time had more than 32 thousand speakeasies—twice the number of saloons that had closed.
     The hard drinking and notorious behavior inside speakeasies set a new tone for alcohol consumption
 in the United States. A glass of cabernet with roast chicken it was not. At the same time, home
 winemaking, however clandestine and resourceful, would ultimately prove detrimental to whatever
 crippled wine industry was left. By the end of Prohibition, the best California vineyards had been torn out
 and replanted mostly with inferior, tough-skinned varieties that would not rot in the boxcar during the long
 haul back east. Over time, an affinity for fine wine was lost, supplanted by a taste for sweet, cheap,
 fortified wine. Even after repeal, the desire for sweet, cheap, and strong remained. It was not until 1967
 that fine table wine, rather than inexpensive sweet wine, once again led production in California.
   By this time, most of the winemakers in America had no historical knowledge and no traditions to rely
 on. Even Robert Mondavi and Ernest and Julio Gallo—three of the most successful vintners of the
 second half of the twentieth century—had to teach themselves to make wine by reading books.

  Meanwhile, out west, another wine-making culture was emerging. In 1629, two
Spanish clergymen—a Capuchin monk named Fray Antonio de Arteaga and a Franciscan
priest named Fray Garcia de San Francisco y Zúñiga—founded missions near present-day
San Antonio, Texas, and Albuquerque, New Mexico, and, in order to have wine to
celebrate the Eucharist, planted the grape listán prieto, which had been grown for a
century in Mexico as misión. Farther west, Franciscan fathers and Spanish soldiers,
moving north from the peninsula of Baja (“Lower”) California, Mexico, into Alta
(“Upper”) California in the mid-1700s, established a string of missions, each a day’s
horseback ride from the next. Each mission had its own vineyard, again based on the
Spanish grape listán prieto, rechristened as mission. These first California vines were the
descendants of vines brought to Mexico two centuries before by explorers including
Hernan Cortés. As the eighteenth century drew to a close, the Alta California missions and
their tiny vineyards stretched beyond San Francisco as far north as Sonoma. They were all
property of the Spanish crown (as was Alta California itself) until 1821, when Mexico
won its independence from Spain, and Alta California became part of Mexico. It wasn’t
until 1846 that Alta California—henceforth known simply as California—was ceded to the
United States, ultimately becoming a state in 1850.




            Busted, circa 1930. A policeman uncovers a stash of liquor and wine in a New York hotel.

    The next big push came with the discovery of gold, in 1849, in the Sierra Foothills. The
Gold Rush brought risk-taking, hardworking, poor, young European adventurers to
California. But when the mines dried up, thousands of European immigrants who did not
strike it rich turned to the occupations they knew: viticulture and agriculture. California at
the time was already home to a number of rugged individualists from all over the world,
who had come to America’s western frontier to seek their fortunes. Two of the most
successful were the Hungarian aristocrat Agoston Haraszthy and the Finnish sea captain
Gustave Niebaum. The dashing Haraszthy not only founded Sonoma’s Buena Vista winery
in 1857 (making it the oldest continually operating winery in the United States), but also
promoted winegrowing with such fervor that for years he was called the Father of
California Wine. In his first year at Buena Vista, Haraszthy is said to have imported 165
different varieties of grapes. And Niebaum, after founding a prosperous fur trading
company, went on, in 1879, to build one of Napa Valley’s most impressive château-style
wineries—Inglenook (today owned by film director Francis Ford Coppola).
                            WHERE THE VINEYARDS ARE
 There are 1 million acres (404,700 hectares) of vineyards planted in the U.S.


   State                         Approximate Acres (Hectares)


   California                    543,000 (219,744)


   Washington State              43,800 (17,725)


   New York State                37,000* (14,973*)


   Oregon                        20,400 (8,256)


   Texas                         3,500 (1,416)


   Virginia                      2,600 (1,052)

 *20,000 of these 37,000 acres (8,100 of 15,000 hectares) are planted with Concord grapes, most of
 which are destined to become grape juice or jelly, not wine.

    As a result of the efforts of such men as these, viticulture in northern California
experienced its first boom. By the 1880s, the West Coast had a thriving wine industry, and
the United States as a whole seemed poised to become a wine-drinking nation, much like
the countries of Europe. But it was not to be. Over the next half century, the United States
wine industry on both coasts crumbled under the cumulative devastation of phylloxera,
followed by Prohibition, followed by World War I, the Great Depression, and World War
II. Although a few wineries managed to hang on and a few others began operating, the
spirit of wine in America was substantially subdued. Wine production was modest at best.
Fairly large wineries controlled most of that production, and most of what they made—
huge blends of cheap, generic, sweet wines—tasted just about the same no matter whose
wine it was or what you bought.
   But a new era was about to dawn, and it would begin in California. In the 1960s and
early 1970s, a wave of wealthy, well-educated, independent-minded men and women
came to northern California with the idealistic notion of starting wineries. In a number of
cases, these individuals—who typically knew little about grape growing—had other
lucrative careers in publishing, medicine, education, technology, banking, or law. Many
wanted a simpler life. Few knew just what kind of life they were in for.
   As the newcomers—the Cakebreads, Shafers, Jordans, and Davieses (of Schramsberg)
—joined by the then established vintners, such as the Martinis, de Latours (of Beaulieu),
Mondavis, and Gallos, the California wine industry boomed for the second time.
Meanwhile, thanks to the financial support provided by an exciting newfound industry, the
enology and viticulture school of the University of California became one of the leading
institutions of its kind anywhere. The quality of California wine soared.
Older vintages of Simi are often still in exquisite condition. The winery was founded in 1876 in the town of Healdsburg
                                                        in Sonoma.

   Then, in 1976, in Paris, an event occurred that would forever change the California
(and American) wine industry. In a blind tasting, renowned French judges were asked to
rank a group of the greatest Bordeaux and Burgundies, along with several unknown
California cabernet sauvignons and chardonnays. When the scores were tallied, the top-
ranked red and white were both California wines. The judges were stunned (and appalled).
The news spread around the world. The Judgment of Paris Tasting of 1976, as it became
known, proved to be a turning point for the culture of wine in the United States. By 1980,
most wine professionals around the world agreed that California wines should be
considered in the same company as the finest wines of Europe.
                                  LABELS AND POLITICS
 In 1989, the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF) issued a controversial regulation
 requiring wine bottles to carry the warning: “(1) According to the Surgeon General, women should not
 drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of
 alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery and may cause health
 problems.” No other country except Mexico has ever mandated a warning label on wine, and the
 Mexican label stipulates that abuse (as opposed to use) is not good for health.
    Soon after the rule was enacted, a well-known California-based wine importer named Kermit Lynch
 proposed balancing the warning with a statement about wine’s benefits. He suggested Louis Pasteur’s
 declaration that wine was the most hygienic beverage known to man. The bureau ruled that the quote
 was unacceptable. Lynch tried again, suggesting a biblical quote about wine’s healing properties. Again,
 the bureau rejected the text.
    Finally, Lynch proposed two quotes from Thomas Jefferson. The first was turned down because,
 according to the BATF, Jefferson had implied that wine was healthy. The second read, “Good wine is a
 necessity of life for me.” That quote was considered acceptable long enough for Lynch to print 50,000
 labels. Upon reconsideration, however, the bureau rescinded its decision, and Lynch was out the printing
 costs.
    When Bill Clinton was elected president in 1992, Lynch decided to try one last time. He wrote to the
 BATF arguing that the phrase “necessity of life” did not imply that wine was healthful, merely that it was
 pleasurable. He also questioned whether it was the role of a governmental agency to censor Thomas
 Jefferson. Lynch’s persistence paid off. Later that year the BATF finally approved Lynch’s request. All
 bottles of wine imported by Kermit Lynch now carry Jefferson’s statement affirming that wine was, for
 him, a “necessity of life.”


AMERICAN VITICULTURAL AREAS
In the United States, the process of defining wine regions was begun in 1978, when the
then Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (today, the Tax and Trade Bureau) began
to draw up requirements for establishing the first American Viticultural Areas or AVAs.
An AVA is defined as “a delimited grape growing region, distinguished by geographical
features, the boundaries of which have been recognized and defined.” On United States
wine labels, such place-names as Napa Valley, Finger Lakes, Willamette Valley, and
Columbia Valley are all AVAs. The first American Viticultural Area was, curiously
enough, Augusta, Missouri, approved in June 1980. The smallest AVA is Cole Ranch, in
Mendocino, California, which comprises just a quarter square mile. The largest AVA is the
Upper Mississippi River Valley. At 29,914 square miles (77,477 square kilometers; an area
larger than Vermont), it is located in parts of four states—Minnesota, Wisconsin, Illinois,
and Iowa. In total, there are now just over two hundred AVAs in the United States.
   At first, it might seem as though American Viticultural Areas and European appellation
systems are similar constructs. In fact, they are immensely different in critical ways. The
appellation rules in European countries do not simply define the boundaries of a region.
They also legally mandate a sweeping array of details, including which grape varieties can
be used in the wine and in what percentages; vineyard and farming practices; how long
and in what type of vessel the wine must be aged; the minimum and maximum alcohol of
the final wine; and so on. By comparison, winemakers in the United States are free to
plant whatever they want and to make wine in almost any way they want.
   Such freedom has one drawback. The premise behind an AVA or an appellation is that
the wines of a given area will share certain characteristics of flavor. However, this has
been difficult to demonstrate in the U.S., where winemakers often treat wines in vastly
different ways. So in the U.S., it can be very hard to determine exactly what is
contributing to any given flavor: some characteristic of the place—or something the
winemaker did.




 Many of the wine regions in the United States are beautifully rural places, where old farming families work the land
                                             using traditional methods.
CALIFORNIA

   NAPA VALLEY | SONOMA | MENDOCINO | SIERRA FOOTHILLS | NORTH
    CENTRAL COAST | LIVERMORE VALLEY | PASO ROBLES AND YORK
                 MOUNTAIN | SOUTH CENTRAL COAST
California is wine’s Camelot—a place of awesome beauty and high ideals; a wine region
where the realm of possibility knows no bounds. The third largest state in the United
States and not quite three-fourths the size of France, California produces more than 90
percent of all wine made in the country. The state’s wine history goes back more than two
centuries to the Spanish explorers and Franciscan fathers who moved north from Mexico
and painstakingly built rustic missions, surrounding them with small vineyards. From
those tentative beginnings, the industry progressed, becoming one of the most successful
in the world.
   Today, the conviction that anything is achievable is as irrepressible as ever in the
Golden State. Fine wines are being made from a steadily expanding range of grapes. At
the same time, better and better classics are being made, including—to name two strong
suits—sumptuous, elegant pinot noirs and gorgeously rich and powerful cabernet
sauvignons.
   California’s nearly 3,500 wine producers range from extremely large (the family-
owned winery Gallo is the largest wine producer in the world) to tiny commercial wineries
that buy grapes and make a handful of barrels of wine in the garage. About 120 grape
varieties are grown in the state, but just 8 lead the production of fine wines. In order, they
are: chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, zinfandel, merlot, pinot noir, pinot gris/pinot grigio,
syrah, and sauvignon blanc. The state’s wine regions cover more than 540,000 acres
(218,500 hectares), stretching more than 700 miles (1,100 kilometers) from the redwood
forests of Mendocino in the north to the sun-drenched hills of Temecula, south of Los
Angeles. The climate, soil, and geology over so vast a territory are markedly different.
Still, overall California is considered to be the New World’s Mediterranean, for the state’s
vineyards are blessed by such generous, bright sunlight that winemakers almost never
worry about whether grapes will ripen. Sunlight and ripeness mean that California wines
are all about cream, not about skim milk. The wines have a natural richness and core of
delicious fruit. They are, in the words of one vintner, “Here-I-am wines.”

      Partimque figures rettulit antiquas, partim nova monstra creavit.
      (Partly we recovered the old, familiar things, partly we created something
      wondrous and new.)
                                                                          — OVID,
                                                                Metamorphoses 436–7
                THE QUICK SIP ON CALIFORNIA
MORE THAN 90 PERCENT of the wine made in the United States is made in
California.
THE STATE’S INCREDIBLY DIVERSE yet largely beneficent climate and geography
allow California wines to be made in a profusion of styles from dozens of different grape
varieties.
WHILE WINEMAKING in the state has spanned four centuries, California is one of the
most modern, technologically oriented wine regions in the world.
                  BEGINNING AND BEGINNING AGAIN

The California wine industry would seem to owe its beginnings to divine providence. As
noted previously, the Spanish explorers and missionaries who moved north from Mexico
in the mid-1700s secured their new territory—known as Alta (Upper) California—with a
string of missions, each a day’s journey from the next. Wine was needed for the Catholic
mass, not to mention for the friars and explorers themselves, who depended on it both for
nourishment (wine was an important source of calories) and as solace amid the harshness
of daily life. According to the historian Thomas Pinney, the Spanish clerical authorities
initially decided that the California missions would be perfectly well off with Mexican
wine, which could be shipped north. But accidents and difficulties along the supply route
ultimately led California’s Franciscan fathers to plant vineyards of their own.
   The cuttings they brought from Mexico were of the Spanish grape listán prieto, and
were descended from those brought to Mexico some two centuries earlier by explorers
such as Hernán Cortés. In Mexico, listán prieto had become known simply as misión, and
later, in California, was spelled “mission,” after the missions where it was planted.
   As the nineteenth century dawned, California settlers began planting small vineyards of
their own, all initially based on the mission grape alone. By the 1830s, commercial
wineries had begun in Los Angeles, and a decade later, in Sonoma and Napa counties.




Expansive, 100-year-old oak trees and rolling dry hills frame many vineyards in California. Here, the syrah and viognier
                                   vineyards of Fess Parker in the Santa Ynez Valley.
                                CHINESE CONTRIBUTIONS
 With the Gold Rush of 1849, Chinese immigrants began to come to California in large numbers. Many
 were poor laborers and farmers who, after working on the transcontinental railroad, immediately went to
 work for the wealthy new winery owners in Sonoma and Napa. From the 1860s to the 1880s, Chinese
 vineyard workers cleared fields, planted vineyards, built wineries, harvested grapes, and dug by hand
 many of northern California’s most impressive underground cellars. What is now the golf course of Napa
 Valley’s prestigious Meadowood resort was once a Chinese camp where several hundred Chinese
 vineyard workers lived in barracks. A few miles away, at the grand old winery Inglenook, handwritten
 payroll ledgers from the 1870s show Chinese winery workers were paid an hourly wage that was a
 fraction of what their fellow Caucasian workers were paid. According to the historian Jack Chen, an
 economic crisis in the late 1870s resulted in agitation against Chinese labor, and ultimately in the
 Chinese Exclusion Act, passed by Congress in 1882. By 1890, hoping for better, safer conditions, most
 of the Chinese in wine country had fled.

   From the 1850s onward, California’s future looked bright. The Gold Rush of 1849
pumped up the local population (in the two years from 1848 to 1850, San Francisco alone
went from 800 inhabitants to 25,000) and created both a new demand for wine and a pool
of potential vintners. Better-tasting zinfandel began to supplant mission as the variety of
choice, and the wine industry shifted north, first to Sonoma and then to Napa, both valleys
being better suited to viticulture than Los Angeles. Some of the great wineries were
founded just after the Gold Rush, including Buena Vista (1857), Charles Krug (1861),
Schramsberg (1862), and Inglenook (1879). As if this boom was not enough, California’s
future soon took on international possibilities, for the mildew odium and the root-eating
insect phylloxera had already begun to destroy the vineyards of Europe.

        CALIFORNIA’S BIGGEST WINE-PRODUCING REGION
    The Central Valley, a vast, hot, fertile, 300-mile (480-kilometer)-long expanse extending from the
    Sacramento Valley in the north to the San Joaquin Valley in the south, produces a full 60 percent of all
    the agricultural products in California and crushes 75 percent of all the wine grapes. There are
    numerous large growers here, wineries are huge; and the wines themselves are mostly super-inexpensive
    generic blends. Such well-established firms as Gallo dominate the region.

   Excitement over burgeoning markets notwithstanding, winemaking at the time was
tough business. The early California vintners had no schools, no technical help, little or no
knowledge of exactly what grape varieties they were planting (the identification of
imported grapevines was hit or miss), very little equipment (even bottles were scarce until
a bottle-making factory was founded in 1862), and few traditions on which to rely. Ever
willful, Californians forged full speed ahead until the mid-1880s, when phylloxera finally
made its way to California. By 1890, the insect had wrought havoc throughout the state,
for California’s vineyards were, at that time, planted with Vitis vinifera varieties grown on
their own roots.
   But by the turn of the century, the solution—planting Vitis vinifera varieties on tolerant
American rootstock—was well known. The California industry rebuilt itself quickly.
Soon, some three hundred named grape varieties were being grown in California, and
there were nearly eight hundred wineries.
               PHYLLOXERA—THE DEVASTATION RETURNS
 The most painful and shocking event in the modern history of California winemaking happened in Napa
 Valley in the mid-1980s. Phylloxera returned. This time around, the insect had mutated into so-called
 Biotype B, and it destroyed grapevines planted on AxR1 rootstock at an astonishing clip. Vintners were
 stunned and despondent. Over the next decade, every vineyard planted on AxR1 (the root-stock had
 been especially prevalent in Napa Valley) had to be replanted from scratch, at a cost estimated, in the
 1990s, to be $3 billion. However agonizing this was, there was a silver lining. With decades’ worth of
 experience and scientific data behind them, California’s vintners changed the grape varieties they
 planted (and the clones of those varieties) to be better suited to their vineyard sites. Napa Valley, in
 particular, went from a region known for a score of white and red varieties to a place highly specialized in
 (and internationally regarded for) superb cabernet sauvignon.


      The name California was used officially in Spanish documents as early as
      1542. It is believed to come from the description of a fabled island called
      California in the sixteenth-century Spanish novel The Exploits of Esplandián.

   To the vintners at that time, the idea that such hard-won success could vanish overnight
must have seemed unreal. But on the sixteenth day of January, in 1920, when the Volstead
Act took effect, Prohibition became the law. Almost fourteen years later, when Prohibition
finally ended, in December of 1933, only 140 wineries remained. Ironically, many had
managed to hang on by making what the very first California winemakers had—
sacramental wines.
   California vintners were down but not out. It would take until the late 1960s and early
1970s for winemaking to build momentum again, but once it did, it soared ahead with
startling speed. Within a decade, California became one of the most advanced and
accomplished wine regions in the world. The enormity of the transformation is captured
by the juxtaposition of two facts. In 1966, the bestselling California wines were cheap,
sweet “Ports,” often made primarily from carignane or Thompson seedless, both of which
were widely grown grapes at the time. Just ten years later, the state’s fine wines were so
good that French judges were left reeling when, in the now legendary Judgment of Paris
Tasting of 1976, two wines—Stag’s Leap Wine Cellars’ cabernet sauvignon and Chateau
Montelena’s chardonnay—took the first places for red and white wine, respectively,
beating out such exalted wines as Château Mouton-Rothschild, Château Haut-Brion, and
Domaine Roulot Meursault-Charmes. (Chateau Montelena, like a number of wineries in
the United States, spells château “New World” style—without the circumflex on the a.) In
the end, the French judges explained away California’s victory, saying that, for wines so
young, of course the California wines—so showy and full of fruit—would indeed be
expected to outshine their more restrained French counterparts; but the ultimate
superiority of the French wines would be clear, the judges argued—just give the French
wines time to age.
              THE MOST IMPORTANT CALIFORNIA WINES
                                      LEADING WINES
         CABERNET FRANC red
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON AND BORDEAUX-STYLE BLENDS red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MERLOT red
         PINOT GRIS white
         PINOT NOIR red
         RHÔNE BLENDS red and white
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white
         SPARKLING WINES white and rosé
         SYRAH red
         ZINFANDEL red

                                      WINES OF NOTE
         ALBARIÑO white
         BARBERA red
         GRENACHE red
         MUSCAT/MOSCATO white (dry and sweet)
         PETITE SIRAH red
         PETIT VERDOT red
         PORT-STYLE WINES red (fortified; sweet)
         RIESLING white (dry and sweet)
         VIOGNIER white

    The organizer of the original Paris tasting, British wine expert Steven Spurrier, did just
that. In 2006, thirty years after the Paris tasting, he held a reenactment of the tasting with
all the same wines, but that time, each wine was at least thirty years older. Two panels of
British, French, and American judges tasted the aged wines. This time, all of the top five
places were awarded to California wines. The 1971 Ridge Monte Bello Vineyard Cabernet
Sauvignon came in first, followed by (in second to fifth places, respectively) Stag’s Leap
Wine Cellars Cabernet Sauvignon 1973, Heitz Martha’s Vineyard Cabernet Sauvignon
1970, Mayacamas Cabernet Sauvignon 1971 (a tie for third), and Clos du Val Cabernet
Sauvignon 1972.

      “Age gives a wine a sense of beauty and satisfaction that it could never have
      had before when it was young. In our minds, we intuit that beauty and
      satisfaction as a feeling of completeness. Because so much of life is
      incomplete, an old wine is remarkable and moving.”
                                                         — WARREN WINIARSKI,
                                                   founder of Stag’s Leap Wine Cellars
Mariah Vineyards’ zinfandel grapes, surrounded by giant redwoods, grow in Mendocino.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Millions of years ago, as large tectonic plates under the Pacific Ocean repeatedly grated
against and smashed into the continent of North America, California was formed. It
became a place of amazing geologic and climatic diversity. Almost every kind of climate,
land formation, vegetation, and animal life that can be found anywhere else in the United
States can be found in California. Much of the state, however, is either too bone-chillingly
cold or too torridly hot to be ideal for wine grapes. Close to the 840-mile-long (1,350-
kilometer) Pacific coastline, people often wear goose-down jackets in the summer. Eighty
miles (130 kilometers) inland, the immense, oval cradle of the Central Valley can be as
blistering as an oven. Most of the top wine regions are poised between these two extremes
—close enough to the ocean to benefit from its cooling effects, yet inland enough to
benefit from the warmth needed for ripening. Thus, the major wine regions are stacked,
one on top of the other, up and down the length of the state, from Santa Barbara County in
the south to Mendocino in the north.
                     THE WHITE GRAPES OF CALIFORNIA
ALBARIÑO: Plantings are small but growing. The grape makes fresh, lively whites evocative of the
famous albariños of northwest Spain.
CHARDONNAY: The most widely planted white grape; it is the source of wines that range from bland to
extraordinary. Most of the best come from cool areas and are made by winemakers who prize balance
over oak.
CHENIN BLANC: Historically used for jug wines; it is capable of making very tasty wines, although
plantings have been in decline for some time.
FRENCH COLOMBARD: Widely planted in less-than-ideal locations; it is grown at very high yields for jug
wines.
GEWÜRZTRAMINER: A very minor grape in terms of production, but some surprisingly delicious wines
come from it, causing fans to wonder why more isn’t planted.
MARSANNE: A minor grape in terms of production but it makes good, simple wines on its own and is a
leading component, with roussanne, in white Rhône-style blends.
MUSCAT CANELLI, BLACK MUSCAT, AND ORANGE MUSCAT: These are three different varieties, all of
which share the word muscat in their names, thanks to their pronounced aromas. All are used primarily to
make delightful semisweet and sweet wines. What is called muscat Canelli in California, the same as
muscat blanc à petits grains, is the most frequently used of the three and is made into dry wines as well
as sweet.
PINOT GRIS: A major grape, also known in California by its Italian name, pinot grigio. It is turned into
light quaffing wines, as well as more serious wines of substance.
RIESLING: California’s dry rieslings pale by comparison to those made in the Old World or even in New
World places like Australia and Washington State. But, more successfully, the grape is turned into a small
number of late-harvest dessert wines, some of which are very good.
ROUSSANNE: A minor grape in terms of production, but prized for its elegance and aroma; it is
sometimes blended with marsanne in white Rhône-style blends.
SAUVIGNON BLANC: A major grape; it makes simple dry wines that are snappy and citrusy, as well as
more complex wines modeled on dry white Bordeaux. It is also used to make botrytized dessert wines.
Sometimes blended with sémillon.
SÉMILLON: A very minor grape in terms of production, despite its high quality; it is used primarily for
blending with sauvignon blanc for white, Bordeaux-style dry wines and botrytized dessert wines.
VIOGNIER: The leading white Rhône variety, it makes opulent, rich, full-bodied whites, evocative of
honeysuckle and melons. Since the mid-1990s, plantings have increased.
                        THE RED GRAPES OF CALIFORNIA
 BARBERA: Fairly widely planted for use primarily in jug wines; harvested at lower yields, it can make a
 fine wine with appealing red cherry and red raspberry flavors.
 CABERNET FRANC: Generally blended in small amounts with cabernet sauvignon or merlot in
 California’s Bordeaux-style blends, although cabernet franc is sometimes found as a stellar wine on its
 own.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: The most important of all red grape varieties and the most widely planted, it
 is capable of making powerful and complex wines that are also ageworthy. Wines made from cabernet
 sauvignon were the first to put California on the international wine map.
 CARIGNANE: The California spelling of the French grape carignan, it was historically used in jug wines
 but is increasingly grown at lower yields to make wines that can contribute solidly to fine-wine blends.
 Often blended with syrah, mourvèdre, and grenache to make Rhône-style blends.
 GRENACHE: Historically planted for use primarily in jug wines, but increasingly, better clones have been
 planted and grown at lower yields to make high-quality, spicy, juicy wines that are often blended with
 syrah, mourvèdre, and carignane to make Rhône-style blends. Also the source of numerous delicious
 rosés.
 MALBEC: A minor grape currently, but it shows considerable promise and plantings are on the rise. It is
 often blended with cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, and merlot to make Bordeaux-style blends.
 MERLOT: A major grape; many solidly good red wines and occasionally some very expensive
 sensational wines are made from merlot. It is used alone and blended with cabernet sauvignon.
 MISSION: California’s historic grape and the one that dominated all plantings until the Gold Rush. It was
 brought to California in the eighteenth century by Spanish explorers and friars via Mexico (where it was
 called misión). According to DNA typing, it is the same as the Spanish grape listán prieto.
 MOURVÈDRE: A minor grape in terms of production but an essential part of the blend in many top
 Rhône-style wines.
 PETITE SIRAH: Makes delicious, robust, highly tannic wines. DNA testing in the late 1990s confirmed
 that what grape growers and wineries have traditionally called petite sirah could be one of (or even a
 blend of) several different grapes, the most likely singular of which is Durif, a cross of the Rhône variety
 peloursin and true syrah. Also spelled petite syrah.
 PETIT VERDOT: A minor but increasingly important grape for its vivid “black/blue” flavor and impressive
 structure. Like malbec, tiny amounts of petit verdot are often blended with cabernet sauvignon, cabernet
 franc, and merlot to make Bordeaux-style blends.
 PINOT NOIR: A major grape; it is capable of making complex, earthy, supple wines, especially when
 grown in cool areas. Also used in sparkling wines.
 SANGIOVESE: One of the leading Italian varieties in California, but making great wine from it remains a
 challenge.
 SYRAH: The most prestigious and most successful of the red Rhône varieties; it makes concentrated,
 deeply colored, earthy wines that can be rich and complex. It is often blended with mourvèdre, grenache,
 and carignane to make Rhône-style blends.
 ZINFANDEL: The second most widely planted red grape variety, it is an enormously versatile grape, used
 for everything from the sweetish pink wine known as white zinfandel to rich, jammy, robust wines that are
 almost purple in color. DNA testing reveals it is Croatian in origin and the same as the grape tribidrag,
 also known as crljenak kaštelanski.

   But there’s more to the story. California’s fine wine regions exist only because of a
unique climatic phenomenon, itself the result of the state’s distinct topography. As the
days warm up and the heat in the interior intensifies and rises, cool winds and fog are
sucked in from the Pacific, either directly into wine valleys (as is the case in the Santa
Maria and Santa Ynez Valleys) or through gaps in the low coastal mountain ranges. The
big, yawning mouth of San Francisco Bay, for instance, acts like a funnel for cool winds
that are drawn in off the ocean and then pulled into Carneros and from there up into Napa
and Sonoma Valleys. All along the coast, a similar cycle of warming and cooling is at
work. Admittedly, this wondrous climatic yin-yang is more dramatic in some wine regions
than in others. Still, it is an essential and crucial aspect of California’s overall viticulture,
for without it the state would be full of areas too hot to produce fine wine.
   Unlike most European winemakers, California winemakers have always been free to
plant whatever grape varieties they want. Accordingly, everything from albariño and
Friulano to petit verdot and carmenere is planted in California. But the top eight varieties
—in order of tons crushed: chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, zinfandel, merlot, pinot noir,
pinot gris/pinot grigio, syrah, and sauvignon blanc—are still, by a wide margin, the
dominant grapes in the state. You’ll find brief portraits of them (whites first, followed by
reds, in alphabetical order) and my recommendations for some of their best producers
starting on page 683.




  Pride Winery at the top of Spring Mountain. The billowing fog in the distance sits like a blanket on the Napa Valley
                                           2,000 feet (609 meters) below.


CHARDONNAY
With nearly 95,000 planted acres (38,400 hectares) as of 2013, chardonnay is the leading
variety in California. More than 758,000 tons (687,600 metric tons) are now harvested
every year (more than any other variety), and chardonnay alone accounts for over 16
percent of all the wine made in the state.
   By all rights, chardonnay should be one of the state’s most exciting wines. Sadly, it
often isn’t. Many examples are simply clumsy wines that taste overwrought, overoaked,
and overdone. What about elegance?
                                      HOW TO MARRY RICH
 From Thanksgiving well into the winter, when much of America is dining on the sort of hearty roasts and
 hot stews that could easily figure into a Dickens novel, Californians are feasting on a wholly West Coast
 indulgence: huge Dungeness crabs. Accompanied by crusty loaves of sourdough bread and washed
 down with glasses of cold chardonnay, Dungeness crab may well be the best use California chardonnay
 is ever put to. Although there are more than four thousand species of crabs in the world (and more of
 these live off the coasts of North America than anyplace else), there are only a few that serious eaters
 need to know about, and the most delicious among these is arguably the Dungeness, 38 million pounds
 (17 million kilograms) of which are landed, on average, every year. More than 20 percent meat by weight
 and weighing about four pounds each, Dungeness crabs are prized for their pure, succulent, sweet
 flavor. As a result, they’re often served cold, with nothing more than warm melted butter as a dipping
 sauce plus fresh lemons. Which is where chardonnay comes in. Rich, sweet on its own, and even
 sometimes a touch minerally, chardonnay’s flavors mirror a lump of butter-drenched crabmeat like no
 other wine can.




   Chateau Montelena, built in 1882, made one of the first California chardonnays to receive international acclaim.

   In fairness, great chardonnay is not easy to make, and the sites where the grapes are
grown are critical. Generally, the best-balanced chardonnays in California come from cool
regions (the Santa Maria and Santa Ynez Valleys of the South Central Coast, for example)
or at least cool pockets within a given viticultural area, such as the coolest sites within the
Russian River Valley and the Sonoma Coast.
   Style, of course, is exceedingly important with chardonnay, and California makes a
variety of styles—from full-bodied, ripe, low-acid, ultra-creamy styles evocative of crème
brûlée, to extremely buttery/toasty styles, to lean, racy, crisp styles that are made without
the influence of new oak or malolactic fermentation. The latter, now on the rise, are
commonly known as “unoaked” chardonnays, and there are stunning examples, such as
Williams Selyem’s unoaked chardonnay—a wine with flavors as pristine as a mountain
stream. The predecessor of these was Napa Valley’s iconic and highly sought after Stony
Hill, an almost Chablis-like chardonnay, sold by a private mailing list. When the first
vintage of Stony Hill chardonnay—vintage 1952—was released (at the then steep price of
$1.95), there were fewer than 200 acres (80 hectares) of chardonnay planted in the entire
state.




In the morning, looking down at the Napa Valley from Cakebread Cellars’ vineyards on Howell Mountain is like looking
                                       down on the foam atop a cappuccino.

   In terms of plant material, most of the chardonnay in California is known as clone 4,
derived from one of the original Wente selections that were brought to California from
France’s University of Montpellier by the Wente winemaking family in the early twentieth
century (see page 731). In addition, there are numerous chardonnay field selections
(groups of clones that are replicated when a new vineyard is established). Among the most
famous are the Hyde, Hudson, Robert Young, See, Rued, Mount Eden, and Spring
Mountain field selections. And finally, many new clones of chardonnay from Burgundy
(the so-called Dijon clones 76, 95, 96, and 548) have been planted in the past decade but
have met with mixed results in California, since such clones ripen early and lose acidity
(which is beneficial in a cool climate such as Burgundy’s, but not in warmer ones).
                  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF CHARDONNAY
    Au Bon Climat • Brewer-Clifton • Cakebread • Clendenen Family • Diatom • DuMOL • Edna Valley •
 Fantesca • Far Niente • Franciscan • Hanzell • Heitz • J. Rochioli • Kistler • Kongsgaard • Liparita • Littorai •
 Mayacamas • Melville • Mount Eden • Navarro • Newton • Paul Lato • Peay • Peter Michael • Ridge • Scribe
                                  • Shafer • Stony Hill • Williams Selyem


PINOT GRIS
In California, the names pinot gris and pinot grigio are used interchangeably for easy-
drinking, dry white wines that fall into two camps. First are no-fuss, basic wines that are
fairly neutral in character, in the manner of most versions of Italian pinot grigio. (This is
not necessarily a bad thing; who doesn’t need the wine equivalent of a basic white T-shirt,
especially if it’s inexpensive?) And second are more flavorful versions that involve better
grapes from better sites and more-involved winemaking. So far, no one region in
California has emerged as the key location for pinot gris, and while the top examples are
tasty, the California wines made from pinot gris are rarely complex.




 Sunset over the Pacific Ocean casts a feathery light over the coastal vineyards of Seaview Ranch in Sonoma County.

        SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF PINOT GRIS/PINOT GRIGIO
  Arbe Garbe • Chalk Hill • Etude • FEL • Gargiulo • Hahn • J Vineyards • Navarro • Palmina • Pavi • Robert
                                      Sinskey • Swanson • Wind Gap


SAUVIGNON BLANC
Despite huge leaps in quality over the past decade, California sauvignon blancs are still
remarkably underappreciated. In the past few years, the very finest ones (Araujo, Rudd
Estate, Arietta, Illumination, Vineyard 29, and Merry Edwards, for example) have
broached the top whites of Bordeaux in sophistication and aging potential. As for the
good, well-priced, every-night sauvignon blancs, they’re racy, keen-edged, refreshing, and
arguably the best California whites for serving with food, thanks to their acidity and clean,
fresh flavors.
   Why the recent quality shift in California sauvignon blanc? The answer lies in the
vineyards—and in economics. Historically, it is much more expensive to farm great
sauvignon blanc than chardonnay. Sauvignon blanc, a vigorous variety that has the
potential to grow out of control, must be carefully and continually trained, hedged, leafed,
and so on, requiring crews of workers to be sent into the vineyard scores of times to keep
the vines’ growth in balance. In the past, many growers simply weren’t willing to spend
the money it took to grow great sauvignon blanc, and as a result, many sauvignons tasted
weedy and cabbagelike. Today, that view has changed radically. All of the good and top
growers now commit far more financial resources to sauvignon blanc than at any other
time in California history. They do so because wineries will pay more for sauvignon blanc
grapes than they have in the past. And wineries are paying more because wine drinkers
have shown a new willingness to spend more on sauvignon blanc—if it’s good.
   Most every-night sauvignon blancs in California are simply made in stainless-steel
tanks which, because they protect against oxygen exposure, help the sauvignon blanc
retain its beautiful, fresh green aromas. More complex, expensive sauvignon blancs are
often made by blending small lots of wine that have been made in a variety of containers
(new oak barrels, used oak barrels, concrete eggs, and stainless-steel drums, for example),
giving the final wine greater depth and character on the palate.
   As for plant material, almost all of the sauvignon blanc grown in California is a single
clone (now named clone 1), thought to have been brought to California from Bordeaux.
Many of California’s top sauvignon blanc producers also grow a more aromatic clone of
sauvignon blanc called sauvignon musqué, as well as a tangy-tasting clone from the Loire
Valley called clone 530.
   Finally, sauvignon blanc in California is sometimes called fumé blanc (a term coined in
the 1960s by Dry Creek Vineyard, in Sonoma’s Dry Creek Valley, and later adopted and
popularized by Robert Mondavi). As a group, California sauvignon blancs are not
stylistically different from wines labeled fumé blanc. Vintners simply use the name they
think you’ll like best and want to buy.
    SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF SAUVIGNON BLANC AND WHITE
                     BORDEAUX-STYLE BLENDS
 Araujo • Arietta • Cakebread • Crocker & Starr • Flora Springs • Frog’s Leap • Grassini • Groth • Illumination
 • Kamen • Lail • Lambert Bridge • Margerum • Merry Edwards • Peter Michael • Robert Mondavi • Rochioli •
                                  Rudd Estate • Spottswoode • Vineyard 29


CABERNET SAUVIGNON
The grape that put California on the international map as one of the world’s top wine
regions, cabernet sauvignon is arguably the state’s single most compelling variety, capable
of producing wines of enormous power and grace, as well as structure and concentration.
Since the late 1980s, the best California cabernets have gotten lusher, richer, and more
complex by the year as winemakers and viticulturists have continued to refine their
methods for growing the grape and making the wine. One of the key elements has been a
new understanding of ripeness and the necessity of letting grapes high in tannin, such as
cabernet sauvignon, hang on the vine long enough—not just for the sugar to mature, but
also for the tannin to mature. Tannin that is ripe feels softer on the palate. Thus, an ideal
California cabernet sauvignon has a significant amount of tannin so that the wine has a
majestic structure and longevity, but at the same time, the character of the tannin is ripe, so
that the wine avoids having a ragged, sandpaper-like texture, and an exceedingly drying
mouthfeel.
   In California, cabernet sauvignon is often the leading component in Bordeaux-style
blends, joining merlot, cabernet franc, malbec, and/or petit verdot.
            THE ORIGIN OF CALIFORNIA’S TOP CABERNETS
 For more than a century, some of the most riveting and powerful cabernets throughout California have all
 traced their parentage back to three clones (genetic subtypes), simply known as 07, 08, and 11. The
 three were imported from Bordeaux (allegedly from Château Margaux) by Irish immigrant James
 Concannon, who had founded Concannon Vineyard in the Livermore Valley, east of San Francisco, in
 1883 (he was the first Irishman to own a California winery). Concannon’s agent in Bordeaux was the
 legendary San Francisco lawyer-turned-grapevine-dealer Charles Wetmore, who himself had founded a
 winery he called Cresta Blanca. While many grape clones died out during Prohibition, the
 “Bordeaux/Concannon clones” survived the thirteen-year ban on wine thanks to Concannon’s reinvention
 of itself as a supplier of altar wine to the Archbishop of San Francisco. In the 1960s, cuttings from the
 three clones were brought from Concannon to the Foundation Plant Services department at the
 University of California, Davis, where they were replicated as virus-free plants. A decade later, 07, 08,
 and 11 vines were planted by now-famous wineries throughout the state, and subsequently became
 legendary wines.


  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF CABERNET SAUVIGNON AND RED
                    BORDEAUX-STYLE BLENDS
ADAMVS • Araujo • Arkenstone • Baldacci BOND • Brand • Cardinale • Caymus • Chappellet • Chateau St.
   Jean • Colgin • Continuum • Corison • Corra • Dalla Valle • Dana • Dancing Hares • Diamond Creek •
Dominus Estate • Dunn • Far Niente • Gandona • Gargiulo • Grace Family • Groth • Harlan • Heitz • Jordan •
Joseph Phelps • Kapcsandy • Kelly Fleming • La Jota • Lail • Laurel Glen • Lokoya • Long Meadow Ranch •
Louis Martini • Mayacamas • Melka • Mount Veeder Winery • Opus One • O’Shaughnessy • Outpost • Ovid •
  Paradigm • Paul Hobbs • Peter Michael • PlumpJack • Quintessa • Reverie • Ridge • Robert Mondavi •
 Rudd • Scarecrow • Schrader • Screaming Eagle • Shafer • Silverado • Silver Oak • Sloan • Spottswoode •
 Spring Mountain Winery • Staglin Family • Stag’s Leap Wine Cellars • Turnbull • Venge • Vérité • Vineyard
                                                    29




In the Red Hills of Lake County, Beckstoffer Vineyards’ high-elevation cabernet sauvignon vines have a view of Snow
                                                     Mountain.


MERLOT
California merlot’s reputation has been on a seesaw for more than a decade. On the one
hand, there are serious, top-notch producers (Duckhorn, Chappellet, Shafer, and Gargiulo,
for example) who make intensely flavored, big-structured complex wines. On the other
side are oceans of innocuous, unstructured merlot that is little more than inexpensive red
wine marketed as “soft.” These fairly bland merlots bear almost no resemblance to the top
versions.
   Interestingly, in California the top merlots are almost never soft per se, many of them
having been produced from grapes grown in the mountains or on volcanic soils. These top
merlots can be, and often are, as magnificently structured and captivating as top cabernet
sauvignons.
                     SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF MERLOT
 Beringer • Chappellet • Crocker & Starr • Duckhorn • Gargiulo • Happy Canyon • Lewis • Liparita • Markham
   • Newton • Nickel & Nickel • Pahlmeyer • Paloma • Paradigm • Pride Mountain • Robert Foley • Robert
            Sinskey • Shafer • Stags’ Leap Winery • Switchback Ridge • Twomey • Whitehall Lane


      “When it’s good, pinot noir doesn’t knock your socks off. It slips them off—
      slowly.”
                                                                 — ROBERT MONDAVI,
                                                         founder of Robert Mondavi Winery


PINOT NOIR
Pinot noir gets my vote for the California wine that has experienced the most immense and
remarkable increase in quality over the past decade. The sheer number of lusciously
textured pinots that are complex and deeply flavored but also refined and elegant is
frankly astounding, for the grape is notoriously difficult to grow and make into fine wine.
Best of all, the very top California pinot noirs possess a sense of beauty and precision—
their flavors are not muddled or diffuse, but rather, what I like to call the flavor equivalent
of the sound of a church bell in the mountains.
   Amazingly, pinot noir is grown over a 500-mile (800-kilometer) coastal span in
California, from the Anderson Valley in Mendocino County, in the far north of the state, to
the Santa Ynez Valley, relatively near Los Angeles, in the south. In between are stunning
appellations for the grape—all of which are highly influenced by cold Pacific breezes and
fog. These include Sonoma Coast, Russian River Valley, Carneros, Santa Lucia Highlands,
Arroyo Grande Valley, Sta. Rita Hills, Santa Ynez Valley, and Santa Maria Valley.
   With pinot noir, clones (different genetic variations) can have a huge impact on the
flavor of the wine, and within California’s top pinot noir growing areas, a vast array of
clonal material is now planted. This includes historic clones such as Pommard (sometimes
called UC Davis 4) and Wadenswil (which came to California and Oregon from Burgundy,
via Switzerland) plus an assortment of the so-called Dijon clones of pinot noir (113, 114,
115, 667, 777, and others), which were first brought to Oregon by Oregon State University
in 1987 and 1988, and planted there before being taken south to California.
                  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF PINOT NOIR
   Alma Rosa • Ancien • Aubert • Au Bon Climat • Belle Glos • Bien Nacido • Bonaccorsi • Brewer-Clifton •
   Calera • Cambria • Capiaux • Ceja • Chamisal • Chanin • Davis Bynum • Dierberg • Domaine Carneros •
    Dragonette • DuMOL • Etude • Failla • Fess Parker • Fiddlehead Cellars • Flowers • Foursight • Foxen •
  Gainey • Hanzell • Hartley Ostini • Hirsch • Joseph Swan • J. Rochioli • Laetitia • Lafond • Kosta Browne •
 Littorai • Marcassin • McIntyre • Melville • Patz & Hall • Paul Hobbs • Paul Lato • Peay • Pisoni • Presqu’ile •
   Radio-Coteau • Rhys • ROAR • Saintsbury • Samsara • Sandhi • Sanford • Saxon Brown • Sea Smoke •
                    Scribe • Siduri • Talisman • Talley • Truchard • Williams Selyem • Wrath


SYRAH
The best French syrahs (from appellations like Côte-Rôtie and Hermitage) are distinctive
wines (gamy, minerally, white peppery, sometimes sweaty and bloody). Similarly, the best
Australian shirazes (from appellations like Barossa Valley and McLaren Vale) are quite
unique (peppery, eucalyptus-y, spicy, licoricey, with a rich core of fleshy fruit). But the
syrahs of California are not as easy to categorize. They can lean in either a French or an
Australian direction (and sometimes—intriguingly—in both at the same time).
   Syrah is, for the most part, not a beginner’s wine. The wine is never shy or tame; it
howls out of the glass. The bloody-sweaty-gamy flavors can be something of an acquired
taste (but like all acquired tastes, once you’ve got it, you’re mad for it). And at least some
of the time, syrah shows a propensity to be what is called “reduced,” that is, it initially
smells a little funky until you swirl the glass vigorously and work oxygen into the wine,
whereupon the wine emerges smelling just fine. Syrah lovers are used to this and it
presents no problem, but a novice can easily be caught off guard.
   Syrah is often a component in California’s Rhône-style wines, where it is joined by
grenache, mourvèdre, carignane, and sometimes cinsault. Such wines are increasingly
popular in the state. Indeed, from next to nothing in the 1980s, the acreage of Rhône
varieties has grown to more than 30,000 acres (12,141 hectares) currently; and nearly two
hundred California producers belong to an organization called the Rhone Rangers.
  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF SYRAH AND RHÔNE-STYLE BLENDS
  Alban • Alta Colina • Andrew Murray • Araujo • Arnot-Roberts • Bonny Doon • Calera • Colgin • Copain •
 Edmunds St. John • Failla • Fess Parker • Jonata • Joseph Phelps • Kongsgaard • Landmark • Margerum •
 Ojai • Paul Lato • Peay • Piedrasassi • Qupé • Radio-Coteau • Samsara • Sanguis • Sans Liege • Saxum •
                 Sean Thackrey • Shafer • Sine Qua Non • Stolpman • Tensley • Zaca Mesa
         SYRAH IN CALIFORNIA: MYSTERIOUS BEGINNINGS
The story of how syrah came to grow in California illustrates just how labyrinthine and complex grape
introductions can be. Often records are lost (if they were kept in the first place), and memories fade. So
the history of syrah in California is spotty, but here’s what is known.
    Syrah (the progeny of two fairly obscure French grapes—dureza and mondeuse blanche) emerged on
the California viticultural scene at least four main times. The first was in 1936, when University of
California at Davis professor Dr. Harold Olmo brought in cuttings from the University of Montpellier, in
southern France (there’s no record of the source of the Montpellier cuttings). This “Montpellier” syrah
remained at UC Davis until 1959, when Dr. Olmo convinced the Christian Brothers winery to plant some
in their vineyards in Napa Valley. Along with the syrah, Christian Brothers reportedly planted other
varieties in the same vineyard, including (probably) petite sirah and carignan. Although that vineyard has
long since been pulled out, Joseph Phelps Vineyards purchased some of the syrah grapes in 1974
(along with syrah cuttings). Since field blends were very common back then, it’s possible that what
Phelps purchased was not syrah alone, but a blend of several varieties. Nonetheless, Phelps
subsequently came out with the first varietally labeled syrah, vintage 1974, and using the cuttings,
planted 20 acres (8 hectares) of syrah in their vineyards.
   Meanwhile, in 1970, cuttings of shiraz were brought to California from the Victoria Plant Research
Institute, in Victoria, Australia. This shiraz was what winemaker/nurseryman Doug Meador planted in his
Meador Estate within Ventana Vineyards, in Monterey County, in 1978. Some wineries subsequently got
their syrah (shiraz) cuttings from Meador. In 1973, three years after shiraz arrived from Australia, more
syrah was brought in from France, from the French national plant materials laboratory, L’Etablissement
National Technique pour l’Amélioration de la Viticulture, commonly known as ENTAV, situated at
Domaine de l’Espiguette. Thus, the “Espiguette clone” was added to the syrahs available in the state. But
a fourth clone was also available, thanks to Dr. Harold Olmo and Gary Eberle, who was then a doctoral
student at UC Davis. Olmo gave Eberle eighteen cuttings from vines growing at UC Davis, vines Olmo
had received years earlier from Max Chapoutier, part of the family that owned the famous Chapoutier
vineyards in Hermitage and Côte-Rôtie, in the northern Rhône. After enlisting Meador’s help to
propagate the cuttings, Eberle planted the “Chapoutier clone” at Estrella Vineyards (where he was the
winemaker), in Monterey. In subsequent years, Chapoutier cuttings were given to winemakers all over
the state. Finally, as you might imagine, with wine-makers driven to establish the best syrah possible in
California, there have also been many reports (always unconfirmed) that some of the state’s best syrah
can be traced back to—shhhhh—“Samsonite clones” (something recently and illegally carried back in a
suitcase).
Old gnarly zinfandel vines—a precious part of California’s viticultural heritage—appear especially poignant in spring
                when all around them in the Napa Valley, the delicate yellow mustard flowers bloom.


ZINFANDEL
Until cabernet sauvignon superseded it in 1998, zinfandel was the most widely planted red
grape in California. Although a large percentage of these grapes are turned into slightly
sweet, mild tasting, inexpensive white zinfandels, the very best grapes are made into the
real stuff: jammy, briary, mouthwatering, bigfruited, dry red zinfandels that can be as
lovable and irresistible as puppies.
    Some of the most prized vineyards in California are those planted with old zinfandel
vines. These gnarled, twisted vines have low productivity, but the grapes often make for
wines of richness and depth. Although the term old vines has no legal definition, if you see
it on a label, it generally signifies that the wine came from vineyards in continual
production for at least forty years, and occasionally more than a hundred.
               The famous Bien Nacido Vineyards of Santa Maria Valley coated in morning fog.

   While zinfandel still grows throughout the state (and is California’s third leading
variety, after chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon), the wine regions where it excels are
usually warm (notably the Dry Creek area of Sonoma County; the Gold Rush counties of
Amador and El Dorado; and the inland AVAs within Mendocino County).
   Zinfandel is both loved (by some) and criticized (by others) for its high alcohol content.
In fact, it’s hard to make zinfandel that doesn’t have a lot of alcohol. The variety is
notorious for uneven ripening on the same cluster. Thus, come late summer, while some
grapes on the cluster will be perfect, others could be raisins and still others could be hard
and unripe. If you press a cluster like this, you end up with something that tastes more like
sweet-and-sour sauce than wine. As a result, most wine-makers are forced to wait for the
unripe grapes to ripen, by which time many of the ripe grapes have begun to raisin. With a
high percentage of sugar in the bunches, the inevitable result is a wine of high alcohol.
   Curiously, zinfandel is rarely blended, although starting in 1966, Ridge began making
some fantastic zinfandels that were blends of zinfandel, petite sirah, and carignane. Today,
the most monolithic and massively concentrated example of a zinfandel blend is The
Prisoner, in which zinfandel is blended with cabernet sauvignon, syrah, petite sirah, char-
bono, grenache, and others. Not for the faint of heart, The Prisoner has a cult following.
   Although few people actually cellar them, the top zinfandels can age beautifully. I was
stunned by the almost Burgundy-like refinement of a 1988 Sutter Home zinfandel that I
took from my cellar and drank twenty-five years later, in 2013. And a 1995 Kunde
Century Vines zinfandel (made from vines planted in 1882!) taken from my cellar later
that same week was, at seventeen years old, achingly good.
   Finally, while zinfandel is often called America’s grape (no place in Europe produces a
wine by that name), it is of European (Vitis vinifera) descent. In the late 1990s, DNA
typing revealed that zinfandel is the Croatian grape historically called tribidrag and now
called crljenak kaštelanski in Croatia. In Italy, it’s also known as primitivo, and is
traditionally grown in Apulia, the “heel” of the Italian boot. The grape found its way to the
United States in the mid-nineteenth century, when Croatia was part of the Austro-
Hungarian Empire. For reasons no one has discovered, it became known by variations of
the name zinfandel.
                  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF ZINFANDEL
  Alex Sotelo • A. Rafanelli • Bedrock • Brown • Carlisle • Dashe • Eberle • Green & Red • Joseph Swan •
  Kunde • Martinelli • Miner Family • Outpost • Paraduxx • Ravenswood • Ridge • Rosenblum • Runquist •
 Seghesio • Steele • St. Francis • Storybook Mountain • Sutter Home • Ted Bucklin • The Terraces • Turley •
                                                 Vineyard 29


                                      NAME A GROWER
          Most avid wine drinkers could name a famous California winery—maybe even a famous
          California winemaker. But a grower? The men and women who grow grapes in most
          U.S. states are virtually anonymous, even though their talents are the fulcrum on which
          great wine hinges. Then there’s Andy Beckstoffer, without a doubt the best-known
          grape grower in northern California, and a man whose farming company now owns over
          5,000 acres (2,000 hectares) of prime vineyard land, from Mendocino County to Napa
          Valley. Dozens of leading wineries, including Stag’s Leap Wine Cellars, Cain, Schrader,
          and Paul Hobbs, use Beckstoffer grapes for their luxury wines. In 2010, to secure a
          vineyard he considered exemplary, Beckstoffer paid one of the then-highest prices ever
          for a vineyard in the United States—$300,000 per acre ($750,000 per hectare). By
          comparison, the highest price then paid for a vineyard in Monterey County, just 150
          miles (240 kilometers) south of Napa Valley, was about a tenth of the price.


SPARKLING WINES
In the 1970s and 1980s, a knowledgeable drinker easily could have distinguished
California sparkling wine from Champagne. Today, doing so would be a lot harder, for the
top California sparklers have complexity, richness, and length.
   The wines, of course, do not taste like Champagne. For one thing, the soils in
California are rarely based on limestone, as are the soils in Champagne. But what the best
California sparkling wines do possess is what I call the contrapuntal tension of great
sparkling wine and Champagne—the fascinating sensory yin/yang between creaminess
and acidity that erupt on the palate simultaneously.
      CALIFORNIA SPARKLERS AND FRENCH CHAMPAGNE:
                      COMPARISONS
The temptation to compare California sparkling wines and French Champagnes is inevitable. Here is a
look at the two types of wine, the styles in which they are produced, the aging on the yeasts each
undergoes, and a host of other factors that influence how each tastes. This chart considers only
California’s traditional (Champagne) method producers, not wines made by the Charmat (bulk) process.

 LOCATION                      California                      France

 WINEMAKING TECHNIQUE Champagne method                         Méthode champenoise

                               Chardonnay, pinot noir, and
                                                               Chardonnay, pinot noir, and pinot
 GRAPES                        occasionally but rarely pinot
                                                               meunier
                               meunier

                                                               Virtually all firms make nonvintage and,
 TYPES OF SPARKLING            Nonvintage, vintage, and
                                                               in exceptional years, vintage and
 WINE                          sometimes prestige cuvée
                                                               prestige cuvée wines

                               Golden, blanc de blancs,
 STYLES OF WINE                                                Golden, blanc de blancs, and rosé
                               rosé, and blanc de noirs

                               Levels not regulated by law     Extra brut: 0–6% sugar Brut: less than
 DEGREES OF                    but most top producers          1.2% sugar Extra-dry: 1.2–1.7% sugar
 SWEETNESS                     follow the European             Sec: 1.7–3.2% sugar Demi-sec: 3.2–
                               standards.                      5% sugar

 NUMBER OF WINES IN A          As many as 50 and as few        Dozens—possibly hundreds—of base
 NONVINTAGE BLEND              as 2 base wines                 wines

 NUMBER OF DIFFERENT
 YEARS IN A NONVINTAGE         Usually 1 to 4 years            Usually 3 to 6 years
 BLEND

 LENGTH OF AGING ON            18 months to 3 years for        15 months minimum for nonvintage; 3
 YEASTS BEFORE                 most nonvintage bruts; up to    years minimum for vintage; prestige
 RELEASE                       10 years for prestige cuvées    cuvées are aged for up to 10 years

                               Approximately 29 million
 YEARLY PRODUCTION                                             Approximately 324 million bottles
                               bottles

                               Most firms grow a               Most firms buy the majority of their
 SOURCE OF GRAPES              substantial amount of their     grapes from the region’s 15,000
                               grapes                          growers

 VINEYARD CLIMATE              Generally cool                  Extremely cool

                               Varies considerably,
 SOILS                                                         Mainly chalky limestone and marl
                               depending on the vineyard
 The late Jack Davies, who, with his wife Jamie, began Schramsberg Vineyards in Napa Valley in 1965. In the process,
                         the Davieses ushered in a new era of fine sparkling wines in the U.S.

   I’m talking here of California sparkling wines made by the traditional (Champagne)
method, in which the fermentation that causes the bubbles takes place inside each
individual bottle. (California does make oceans of cheap fizzies, such as André, Tott’s, and
Cook’s, which are made in large tanks by faster, cheaper methods such as the Charmat
process. These are definitely not in the same class.)
   For the best California sparklers, the path to excellence was neither simple nor
straightforward. The story begins in Sonoma in the mid-1890s, when three brothers,
Czechoslovakian immigrants named Korbel, made California’s first sparkling wines. Old
ledgers indicate that the Korbels used several grapes, including chasselas, riesling,
traminer, and muscatel, and that they made their sparkling wine by the traditional
(Champagne) method.
   Despite this promising beginning, the period from Prohibition to the 1960s was a kind
of Dark Ages for California sparkling wine. Most of the sparklers produced were cheap,
frothy, Charmat-method wines. Only Korbel and the Napa Valley winery Hanns Kornell
continued to make traditional-method sparklers. But with the founding of the then tiny
Schramsberg winery, in the mid-1960s, a new age for California sparkling wine dawned.
The first Schramsberg wines were made with chardonnay—a grape that was scarce in the
1960s.
    Quickly outclassing every other California sparkling wine being made, Schramsberg’s
sparklers, and the emerging fine wines of California in general, did not go unnoticed by
the Champenois themselves. Not only were certain parts of California well suited to
growing chardonnay and pinot noir, but land in California—unlike land in Champagne—
was both available and, at that time, affordable. (Champagne is a delimited area. Virtually
all of the best land has already been planted.) In 1973, the famous Champagne house Moët
& Chandon purchased 200 acres (80 hectares) in Napa Valley and, with an initial $2.5-
million investment, established Domaine Chandon. Over the next fifteen years, some half
dozen of the top Champagne firms, plus the Spanish sparkling wine giants Freixenet and
Codorníu, would set up joint ventures or subsidiaries in California. Today, most of the
wineries in California that make traditional method sparkling wine also specialize in still
(non-bubbly) pinot noir and/or chardonnay.
   Finally, a few other facts. California’s largely benevolent climate allows vintage
sparkling wines to be made every year (unlike in Champagne, where vintage wines are
made only three or four times per decade). However, as is true in Champagne, sparkling
wine producers in California make several styles of bubbly, including blanc de blancs
made entirely from chardonnay grapes, and/or blanc de noirs made entirely from the red
grape pinot noir. (Interestingly blanc de noirs are rarely, if ever, made in France, where, if
you want a wine with a fuller-bodied character, you drink rosé Champagne.) And lastly,
most California sparkling wine firms also make a top-of-the-line sparkling wine that
would be equivalent to a prestige cuvée in Champagne. These may be aged for up to ten
years on the yeast lees before being disgorged. Among the best are Roederer Estate’s
L’Ermitage, Schramsberg’s J. Schram, and Domaine Carneros’s Le Rêve.
          SOME OF THE BEST CALIFORNIA SPARKLING WINE HOUSES
  Domaine Carneros • Domaine Chandon • Gloria Ferrer • Iron Horse • J Vineyards • Mumm Napa Valley •
                                 Roederer Estate • Schramsberg




DESSERT AND PORT-STYLE WINES
California’s dessert wines and Port-style wines are like gems kept hidden in the jewelry
box. Quietly, over the past few decades, while seemingly few people were taking notice,
some have become simply extraordinary.
   Dessert wines in California generally fall into one of three broad groups:
BOTRYTIZED WINES     made from sauvignon blanc and sémillon, and modeled on Sauternes
LATE-HARVEST WINES,   usually made from riesling
WINES FROM THE MUSCAT FAMILY     of grapes, modeled on southern French and Italian dessert
wines
    Sauternes-style wines are rare and very difficult to make in California, since the state
tends to be either too dry and hot or too cool for the perfect formation of noble rot,
Botrytis cinerea. However, in 1957, Beringer’s famous winemaker Myron Nightingale
made California’s first botrytis-induced sweet wine by inoculating already harvested
grapes with botrytis spores in a laboratory. Because Beringer Vineyards’ “Nightingale” is
still handcrafted in much the way Nightingale himself made the first such wine, only sixty
to three hundred cases of half-bottles are made each year. Even so, that’s more than many
other botrytized dessert wines in California.
   Then there’s Dolce, considered by many to be California’s most hedonistic wine, made
from sémillon and sauvignon blanc grapes botrytized as they grow in the vineyard (this
was once considered impossible in California—or at least not reliably possible). First
made in 1985 by the same owners as Far Niente, Dolce comes from a low-lying, sheltered
vineyard in Coombsville, in the southeastern corner of Napa Valley, where fog and
humidity collect each morning. The grapes are harvested some two months after most
Napa Valley grapes have been made into wine, and they are harvested painstakingly over
six weeks by specifically trained workers who go into the vineyard over and over again.
Using special shears, all berries that are not botrytized are cut away. Sometimes a cluster
will have just one single berry deemed worth keeping. Needless to say, the wine deserves
to be rather expensive—in 2013, the half-bottle cost $85.
   As for riesling, California’s late-harvest versions are generally made by letting the
grapes hang for an extended period of time on the vine and then stopping the wine’s
fermentation early, thereby leaving some natural sweetness in the wine. Great late-harvest
rieslings are, like botrytized wines, rare in California and exceptionally hard to make
(many turn out to be dull, sweetish wines without verve, grip, lushness, or complexity).
One of the best has been a knockout for two decades—Chateau St. Jean’s Special Select
Late Harvest Riesling, from the renowned Belle Terre Vineyard, in Alexander Valley.
   Sweet wines from southern France and Italy are the inspiration for many easy-to-love,
dazzlingly aromatic California dessert wines made from muscat grapes. A large, ancient
group of grape varieties (only some of which are genetically related), wines with the word
muscat in their names were spread throughout the Mediterranean by the Phoenicians (the
present-day Lebanese) and Greeks. In California, the leading muscat varieties are muscat
of Alexandria, muscat blanc à petits grains (also known as muscat blanc and muscat
Canelli), orange muscat (muscat fleur d’oranger), and black muscat (muscat of Hamburg).
Muscat wines are usually not as syrupy or voluptuous as other dessert wines, but instead
are riotously fresh and full of racy mandarin orange, melon, and apricot flavors. They are
some of the most charming (if underappreciated) sweet wines from the state. The leading
California wineries for world-class sweet muscats are Navarro (in Anderson Valley),
whose Cluster Select Late Harvest Muscat Blanc is sensational and refined; and Quady (in
the Central Valley), which specializes only in dessert wines. In 1980, Quady produced a
sweet orange muscat called Essensia, and then, in 1983, a black muscat called Elysium.
Each is an epiphany of pleasure.
    California Port-style wines are a mixed bag. In the past, many were simply inexpensive
syrupy-sweet wines made from rather poor-quality, overripe grapes. While such “Ports”
still exist, the best California Port-style wines are made by a handful of wineries that
generally use traditional Portuguese grape varieties, such as touriga nacional, tinta cão,
and tinta roriz. There are also, however, some excellent examples made from zinfandel
and petite sirah. Again, Quady is a leader, with a magnificently rich, citrusy, mocha-y
Port-style wine called—playfully—Starboard. (In 2006, out of respect for European place
names, the U.S. signed an agreement with the European Community on the use of semi-
generic foreign geographic names on alcoholic beverages. The result is that any U.S. wine
created since 2006 cannot legally use the word Port on its label. However, U.S. wines that
were called Port before 2006 can still use the term, provided that their brand name has not
changed and the proprietary name of the wine has not changed. Thus, Prager Royal Escort
Port is legally compliant, since this wine predates 2006.)

      “The simple physical act of opening a bottle of wine has brought more
      happiness to the human race than all the collective governments in the history
      of the earth. Even organized religions are mere spiritual mousetraps compared
      to the ‘pop’ of a cork, the delicious squeak when you loosen it from the firm
      grip of the corkscrew. And then the grandeur of the burble as we fill the glass,
      the very same sound we hear at the source, the wombs of all the rivers on
      earth.”
                                                             — JIM HARRISON,
                                   American poet and writer, from the essay “Wine”
      THE VINEYARDS AND MAJOR WINE REGIONS

From a scientific standpoint, California’s vineyards are immensely varied, from computer-
enhanced vineyards that incorporate NASA technology to scraggly vineyards dotted with
hundred-year-old, untrellised zinfandel vines standing like solitary Rumpelstiltskins, their
thick trunks bent and long tresses of leaves sprouting from their heads.
   What follows is a look at the major wine regions of California. (As of 2013, California
had 120 American Viticultural Areas, ranging from tiny to large.) First we’ll explore the
familiar regions of Napa Valley, Sonoma County, and Carneros, the region that straddles
them. Then we’ll travel more or less north to south, beginning with Mendocino and Lake
counties; followed by the Sierra Foothills; followed by the North Central Coast (composed
of the Santa Cruz Mountains, Monterey, Chalone, Mt. Harlan, Carmel Valley, and the
Santa Lucia Highlands). Then it’s on to Livermore Valley, Paso Robles, and York
Mountain, as well as Edna Valley and Arroyo Grande. And, finally, there’s the magnificent
South Central Coast wine regions of Santa Barbara County, Santa Ynez Valley, Santa
Maria Valley, Sta. Rita Hills, Ballard Canyon, and the fittingly named Happy Canyon.
                                  NAPA VALLEY

About 48 miles (77 kilometers) north of San Francisco, Napa Valley is California’s best-
known and most renowned wine region, even though it is responsible for an astoundingly
small amount of all the wine produced in the state—just 4 percent. Its fame (and infamy)
is derived from an eventful commingling of history and humanity. For almost a century
and a half, the valley has attracted a majority of the most ambitious, talented, driven, and
outspoken vintners in the United States.
   Where else but in the Napa Valley would a palatial wine estate (Inglenook) be built by
an adventurous Finnish sea captain and fur trader named Gustave Niebaum, then sold,
more than a hundred years later, to a superstar film director named Francis Ford Coppola?
Where else but in the Napa Valley would an Olympian monolith called Opus One be built
by two of history’s most iconic vintners, Robert Mondavi and Baron Philippe de
Rothschild? Where else but in the Napa Valley would the first California wine to cost
$100 a bottle be made (in 1989), not to mention the first to cost $200 (in 1994), not to
mention the first wine that cost more than $300 (in 2006)? The first two wines were
Diamond Creek Cabernet Sauvignon Lake Vineyard 1987 and 1992, respectively; the third
wine, the 2004 Harlan Estate.
    Critics say Napa Valley has an ego. But what it really has is a gargantuan appetite for
life and success. You can taste it in the wines. While Napa Valley is not the only California
region to make great wine, it consistently makes a good share of the most polished, classy,
and complex wines in the state—especially the cabernet sauvignons.
   Named as California’s first AVA in 1981, the valley proper is small and neatly framed.
Stretching in a banana shape from northwest to southeast, it is 30 miles (48 kilometers)
long (similar to the length of Burgundy’s Côte d’Or) and ranges between just 1 and 5
miles (1.6 and 8 kilometers) wide. It begins at a bay (San Pablo) and ends at an extinct
volcano (Mount St. Helena). On each side, the valley is flanked by mountain ranges—the
Vaca Mountains on the eastern side; the Mayacamas Mountains on the western side. The
general climate is quite Mediterranean, with dry, warm summers and wet, cool winters.

      Four thousand years ago, Napa Valley was home to many thousands of Wappo
      Indians, although there is almost no trace of a Native American population in
      the valley today. The word napa comes from the Wappo dialect and means
      “plenty.”

   Although, to the untrained eye, the valley looks geographically uniform, nothing could
be further from the truth. The volcanic eruptions that occurred here millions of years ago
—which caused the valley floor to rise and then collapse; plus the quashing together of the
North American and Pacific plates; plus the sedimentary soils that have been deposited
here, conveyer belt fashion, from what was once the Pacific Ocean floor; plus the cyclical
flooding and receding of the Napa River—have, taken together, left the valley with a huge
diversity of soils. Soil scientists categorize all of the world’s soils into twelve orders, for
example, and Napa Valley has six of them—an astounding array for such a small place.
Within those orders are almost three dozen different soil series and over a hundred soil
variations. The topography itself is also irregular, with numerous benches, canyons, and
what geologists call “toes” that have formed as a result of landslides off the mountains,
plus vast alluvial fans of soils conveyed by water flowing down from the tops of
mountains to the valley below. This geologic potpourri, coupled with highly independent
winemaking styles (there are more than four hundred wineries in Napa Valley, and most
are small and family owned), means that wine estates next door to one another often make
wines that taste totally different.
   The valley’s geologic diversity is underscored by its variable climate. In summer, a
person standing at the cool southern end, which is open to San Pablo Bay, might be
pulling on a sweater at the very same minute someone in the north, near Calistoga, might
be stripping down to a bathing suit. In the early morning, the vineyards at 2,600 feet (800
meters), in the mountains, may be swathed in warm sunshine, while vineyards at 200 feet
(60 meters), near the valley floor, are sitting under a cold, gray layer of fog. In addition,
vineyards on the eastern hills, along the Vaca mountain range, receive copious amounts of
late afternoon heat and light, as the sun sets beyond the Pacific. Thus, grapes on this side
of the valley (especially in Howell Mountain, the Stags Leap District, and the eastern sides
of Oakville and Rutherford) can get very ripe, and the wines can be very full-bodied. By
contrast, wineries on the western side of the valley, along the Mayacamas Mountains (Mt.
Veeder, Spring Mountain, St. Helena, and the western sides of Oakville and Rutherford),
get the cooler morning sun and generally make balanced wines that aren’t as mammoth.
North/south, east/west, high altitude/low altitude, the factors that effect a given vineyard’s
mesoclimate are almost holographic.
   What virtually all of the valley shares (thanks to the nearby Pacific Ocean) is a huge
diurnal temperature fluctuation. Nighttime temperatures can be 30° or even 40°F (17° to
22°C) lower than daytime temperatures. This allows the vines to grow according to a
nearly ideal rhythm of nighttime rest and daytime photosynthesis. In the best vintages, the
result are grapes that are ripe, but contain the acidity needed for pure flavors and a sense
of elegance.
   Napa Valley vineyard land is thought to be the most expensive agricultural land in the
United States. As of 2013, a planted vineyard in a prime location would cost in the
neighborhood of $350,000 or more per acre ($875,000 per hectare), making the valley the
most expensive agricultural land of any type in the United States. Vineyards cover just
over 43,500 acres (17,600 hectares) of the 485,000 acres (196,300 hectares) that constitute
the valley.
                       THE LEGENDARY ROBERT MONDAVI
 Napa Valley’s reputation as the premier wine region in the United States is due not only to the quality of
 its wines, but also to the relentless will of its vintners, including the late Robert Mondavi. Born in Virginia,
 Minnesota, in 1913, Mondavi grew up with hardworking Italian immigrant parents and got into Stanford
 University during the Great Depression. From owning a fruit packing business during Prohibition, the
 family eventually went on to become winery owners by purchasing Napa Valley’s Charles Krug winery in
 1943. Robert was in charge of the business and marketing; his older brother, Peter, was in charge of
 winemaking. But after his brother fired him during a severe quarrel in 1965, Robert Mondavi moved six
 miles south to the hamlet of Oakville and, at the age of fifty-three, started his own winery, naming the
 venture after himself. Despite years of subsequent lawsuits with his brother, and what appeared to be
 endless family infighting, Mondavi succeeded in making the Robert Mondavi Winery an international
 emblem of a top California estate. Throughout, Mondavi was a tireless crusader for California’s place in
 the wine empyrean. His credo—that California wines belonged in the company of the greatest wines of
 the world—became a refrain he repeated endlessly to anyone who would listen. Countless did, and
 Mondavi rose to international fame, eventually forming some of the wine world’s first global joint
 ventures. (Mondavi reportedly struck the deal with Baron Philippe de Rothschild, of Château Mouton-
 Rothschild, in the baron’s bedroom, with the baron still in his pajamas.) In his later years, Mondavi, with
 his wife, Margrit, brought wine together with art, music, and cuisine as an exploration of culture and living
 well. In 2004, amidst fractious disagreements among Mondavi’s children and among the winery’s
 investors, Constellation Brands was able to launch a takeover, and eventually acquired the Robert
 Mondavi Winery for $1.36 billion in cash, and assumed the winery’s debt.

   Although Napa Valley is planted with numerous varieties, no grape captures the
success of the valley better than cabernet sauvignon. Chardonnay, sauvignon blanc,
merlot, and zinfandel can all become very good, and occasionally brilliant, wines in Napa
Valley, but the top cabernets are phenomenal. No other wine region in the country makes
as many stunningly rich and complex cabernets year after year.
    Some of these top-notch cabernet sauvignons are made from 100 percent cabernet. But
others have small amounts of merlot, cabernet franc, petit verdot, and/or malbec—the so-
called Bordeaux varieties—blended in. Some of these wines are given a proprietary name
if the percentage of cabernet is less than 75 percent. (In 1974, Joseph Phelps was the first
to release a proprietarily named “Bordeaux blend”—Insignia.) Today, even more
commonly, top estates in Napa Valley simply refer to the wine by the estate name. So, for
example, Harlan Estate’s cabernet sauvignon-based wine is labeled simply Harlan Estate;
Dalle Valle is just Dalla Valle, and so on. This, of course, truly mirrors Bordeaux, where
the top wine of Château Margaux is labeled simply Château Margaux.

NAPA VALLEY AVAS
In addition to the American Viticultural Area Napa Valley, there are sixteen smaller AVAs
within the valley. Some of these AVAs are in the mountains, others, on the valley floor and
lower hillsides. (A word about the so-called “valley floor.” The term is useful because it
distinguishes these vineyards from mountain vineyards. Yet Napa’s “Valley floor” isn’t
really the floor of the valley, but rather undulating benches of land that, in a series of
steps, are a few hundred feet higher than the small Napa River that flows essentially
north/south through the valley.)
            AFTER THE SIXTIES: NOTHING WAS EVER THE
                              SAME
         1966. The Beatles had just released Yellow Submarine. The first episode of Star Trek
         aired. Doctor Zhivago played in movie theaters. The most sought-after Napa Valley
         wine was Inglenook Cask Cabernet Sauvignon; at $5 a bottle, it was the most
         expensive wine in the state. There were one or two women winemakers in Napa Valley,
         but they were self-taught; no viticultural school in the U.S. had yet enrolled women. And
         it was the first year the Napa County Agricultural Commission reported the exact
         acreage of grapes grown in the valley. Astoundingly, and even though Napa Valley had
         only about a third as much vineyard acreage as it has today, eighty different varieties of
         grapes were grown (forty-two reds and thirty-eight whites). In 1966, the valley’s most
         planted reds (in order of prominence) were petite sirah, zinfandel, gamay, carignane,
         and cabernet sauvignon. The most planted whites: French colombard, sauvignon vert,
         sauvignon blanc, golden chasselas, and the unfortunately named white grape burger.
         But as popular a crop as grapes were, the leading agricultural industry in Napa Valley in
         1966 was livestock (especially cattle), and not far behind were prunes (public schools
         started late so that Napa Valley children like Michael Mondavi could help pick prunes)
         and dairy (more than 4.5 million dozen Napa Valley eggs were sold that year). It would
         be six more years before Napa Valley’s main town, St. Helena, got its first stoplight.

   In terms of the prestige of their wines, the most important of the mountain AVAs are:
Howell Mountain, Diamond Mountain District, Spring Mountain District, and Mount
Veeder. The most important valley floor/lower hillside AVAs are Stags Leap District,
Oakville, Rutherford, and St. Helena. The AVA Carneros, at the southern tip of the valley,
straddles both Napa and Sonoma counties, and is covered on page 705.
   Napa’s mountain AVAs, and the vineyards that comprise them, are highly prized, for
the wines from them can be superbly concentrated and structured, yet elegant at the same
time. At up to 2,400 feet (730 meters) in elevation, the mountains provide an environment
where grapes ripen slowly, yet because these vineyards are above the fog line, the grapes
are also drenched in luminosity for long hours each day. Additionally, mountain soils are
nearly always shallow and infertile, leading to smaller vines that produce tiny grapes. If
the grapes are red, their small size means there’s a larger skin-to-juice ratio, leading to
mountain wines with impressive tannic structures.
   Examples of high-quality Napa mountain wines are numerous, and some wineries make
several different wines from the grapes of different mountains. Among those not to be
missed:
FROM HOWELL MOUNTAIN:  the merlots from Beringer and the cabernet sauvignons from
Dunn, O’Shaughnessy, and Ladera, and Adam’s
FROM MOUNT VEEDER:    the cabernets from Mayacamas, O’Shaughnessy, and Mount Veeder
Winery; the syrahs from Lagier Meredith; the sauvignon blanc from Rudd
FROM DIAMOND MOUNTAIN DISTRICT:     the cabernets from Diamond Creek
FROM SPRING MOUNTAIN DISTRICT:    the zinfandels from Ridge’s York Creek; the cabernets
from Cain, Pride, Newton, Lokoya, and Spring Mountain Vineyard; and one of the most
legendary of all California chardonnays, Stony Hill’s
   Napa’s valley floor and lower hillside AVAs are some of the oldest AVAs in the valley.
Perhaps the two best known are Oakville and Rutherford, which, geologically speaking,
are either primarily large alluvial fans (on the west side) or volcanic landslide slippages
(on the east side). The areas sit side by side and spread out north and south from the towns
of Rutherford and Oakville, smack in the heart of the valley. Some of the most famous and
historic of all Napa wineries are found here, including, in Oakville: Far Niente, Harlan,
Screaming Eagle, Rudd, Gargiulo, Groth, Dalle Valle, Opus One, Ovid, Silver Oak, and
Robert Mondavi Winery. And in Rutherford: Caymus, Dana Estate, Quintessa, Staglin,
Grgich Hills, Scarecrow, Cakebread Cellars, and the two old grande dames: Beaulieu
Vineyard (BV) and Inglenook.
   Stags Leap District, a small pocket of land on the lower hillsides in the southeast corner
of the valley, is about the same size as New York City’s Central Park. The district is
named for what looms above it—majestic, sun-dappled outcroppings of tortured rock,
over which, as fable has it, stags have leapt to escape hunters. The vineyards have a more
auspicious existence, sprawled as they are on the rocky foothills below. The district is
known mainly for cabernet sauvignons from such leading wineries as Shafer, Stag’s Leap
Wine Cellars, Stags’ Leap Winery, Silverado Vineyards, Chimney Rock, and Clos du Val.




   Finally, among the valley floor/lower hillside appellations is St. Helena, ringing the
small town of St. Helena, the heartbeat of the valley proper. St. Helena is where the valley
constricts, like the center of an hourglass. Indeed, at the tightest spot, it’s no more than a
mile (1.6 kilometers) from the west side to the east side. The constriction traps warmth,
ensuring even and full ripeness. Most St. Helena vineyards hug the western foothills and
many are sited on alluvial fans. Again, cabernet sauvignon reigns here, especially from top
wineries such as Corison, Spotteswoode, Crocker & Starr, Newton, and Vineyard 29.
                   THE TOP NAPA VALLEY CABERNET SAUVIGNONS
 The quality of Napa Valley cabernet sauvignon is very high across the board, but following are the estates
                                   that I would put in the highest ranks.
 Araujo • BOND* • Colgin • Corison • Dalla Valle • Diamond Creek • Gargiulo • Grace Family • Groth • Harlan
 Estate • Heitz • O’Shaughnessy • Ovid • Quintessa • Rudd Estate • Scarecrow • Screaming Eagle • Shafer
        * BOND is made up of five separate estates: St. Eden, Melbury, Quella, Vecina, and Pluribus
               WHEN YOU VISIT… NAPA VALLEY
NAPA VALLEY WINERIES love visitors, the tasting room staffs are well trained, and it’s
easy to get around, since there are just two main roads—Highway 29 and the Silverado
Trail. Make reservations well ahead.
CULTURAL EVENTS abound here; many tastings involve food pairings; and the usually
well-earned “detoxifying” massages at the many fantastic spas are obligatory.
RESTAURANTS ARE NUMEROUS and excellent, including the restaurant many
consider the single best in the United States: The French Laundry, in the little hamlet of
Yountville.
SUMMERTIME IN GENERAL, as well as harvest time in September and October,
mean traffic lines on these small roads. On the other hand, the valley is beautiful and a
joy to visit in the winter and spring, when the number of visitors is far smaller.
                      The Napa Valley Wines to Know
                                          SPARKLING WINE




                                         SCHRAMSBERG VINEYARDS

                   J. SCHRAM | PRESTIGE CUVÉE, VINTAGE BRUT | NORTH COAST
                                Approximately 80% chardonnay, 20% pinot noir
J. Schram is the prestige cuvée (top of the line) of Napa’s historic Schramsberg winery, credited with initiating, in
the mid-1960s, California’s modern era of sophisticated sparkling wines made by the traditional (Champagne)
method. While just under half of the grapes for this wine are sourced in Napa Valley, I’ve included Schramsberg
here because this is where the estate is, and because the wine is not to be missed. This is California’s answer to
Krug Champagne—a sparkler that is caramelly-rich, toasty, creamy, and nothing short of voluptuous on the palate.
The wine is named for Jacob Schram who, in 1862, established Schramsberg, then the first winery on the hillsides
of the Napa Valley.

                                                   WHITES
                                                    STONY HILL

                                         CHARDONNAY | NAPA VALLEY
                                                  100% chardonnay
From Stony Hill’s volcanic hillside vineyards comes Napa Valley’s most historic chardonnay. When it was first
made, by novice wine-makers Fred and Eleanor McCrea in the mid-1940s, there were fewer than 200 acres (80
hectares) of chardonnay planted in the entire state. (The first vintage of Stony Hill chardonnay—the 1952—was
released at the then significant price of $1.95.) Their wine’s reputation rests on its absolutely amazing ability to age.
Stories abound of twenty-five-and thirty-year-old Stony Hill chardonnays that still tasted gorgeously bright thanks
to the wine’s exquisite acidity. Oblivious to fashion, Stony Hill continues to make its chardonnay not in an oaky,
buttery style, but rather in a leaner, purer one.




                                                ROBERT MONDAVI

                    FUMÉ BLANC | RESERVE | TO KALON VINEYARD | NAPA VALLEY
                                               100% sauvignon blanc
The To Kalon (the name means “the highest beauty” in Greek) vineyard sits right behind the Robert Mondavi
Winery, up on a bench of land at the foothills of the Mayacamas Mountains. Within the vineyard is one of the oldest
plots of sauvignon blanc in Napa Valley, the source of this unusually distinctive, exotic, exquisite wine. Unlike
most sauvignon blancs, it doesn’t taste vividly “green.” Instead, it’s fresh and stony—like the air in a dry creek bed
after it rains. The late Robert Mondavi was one of the first vintners to use the name fumé blanc (now a synonym for
sauvignon blanc), which he felt sounded more sophisticated than sauvignon blanc and was reminiscent of the Loire
Valley village Pouilly-Fumé, where sauvignon blanc is the leading grape.
                                             VINEYARD 29
                                     SAUVIGNON BLANC | NAPA VALLEY
                                              100% sauvignon blanc
Just a tiny amount of Vineyard 29’s sauvignon blanc is made, but it’s hugely significant, for it reveals a whole new
side of what is possible in the Napa Valley—namely, to make a complex, luxurious, age-worthy Napa white on par
with the great, famous white Bordeaux. The wine is a showstopper, with the faintest hints of meadows and
hedgerows, and a distinct earthiness and minerality. But more than anything, it’s the texture that gets you—a
yinyang between creaminess and spikiness… as if you were getting a Swedish and a shiatsu massage at the same
time. In California, fascinating sauvignon blancs like this don’t usually happen by themselves, and indeed, the
winery uses innovative, painstaking techniques like chilling the harvested whole clusters of grapes to just above
freezing for several days to soften the skins, and then fermenting the wine in three vessels—concrete eggs,
stainless-steel drums, and new French oak barrels that have been bent into shape by immersion in hot water rather
than by toasting, since toasting would leave too much of a toasty impact on the wine. As with Château Haut-Brion
Blanc, I could drink this wine all day (if only such were possible).

                                                     REDS
                                                 KONGSGAARD

                                SYRAH | HUDSON VINEYARD | NAPA VALLEY
                                                    100% syrah
John Kongsgaard is a legendary winemaker in Napa Valley—known for making incredibly distinctive wines packed
with personality (and for blasting classical music so loud that neighbors miles away can hear what he’s listening to).
Kongsgaard (formerly the wine-maker for Newton Vineyards) started his own winery in 1996, and among all of his
immaculate wines, I may love this one the best. For starters, it’s like smelling Christmas—pine boughs, mulling
spices, cranberries, a wood fire. But then come the flavors—layers and layers of fruit, black pepper, black olives,
and violet-like flowers, and a salty minerality that makes syrah so compelling. Needless to say perhaps, but roast
lamb is in order.
                                                   SHAFER
                                 HILLSIDE SELECT | STAGS LEAP DISTRICT
                                            100% cabernet sauvignon
Made from blueberry-sized grapes grown on hillside outcroppings of scrappy rock in the tiny Stags Leap District,
Shafer’s Hillside is one of the most powerful, lush cabernets in California. For all its gravitas and massiveness, the
wine is impeccably balanced and so sensual it’s impossible to resist. The texture is like cashmere; the flavors and
aromas a complex interplay of cassis, dark chocolate, worn leather, sweet tobacco, bitter espresso, and black
licorice. I have tasted every vintage of Hillside back to the first one, made in 1983, and remain thoroughly
impressed year by year.
                                                      OVID
                                                  NAPA VALLEY
         Approximately 60% cabernet sauvignon, 25% cabernet franc, plus merlot and petit verdot
Ovid (the name of both the winery and the wine) takes its name from the Roman poet Ovid (43 B.C. to C. A.D. 18),
who wrote about the enigma of metamorphosis (everything changes, yet everything stays the same… an apt way of
thinking about a vineyard). These vineyards sit high on a red volcanic rock promontory, a few hundred feet above
Oakville, on the warm, luminous eastern side of the valley. You can taste the hardness of the rock and the energy of
the sun in the wine. Scrumptious and rich, this is a cabernet blend with vivid, rapier-like intensity, its concentrated
cranberry/chocolate/spice fruitiness pierced by a sense of minerals and licorice. Drinking this wine always reminds
me of hand developing a photograph in the old days, and watching with wonder as the picture radiates into focus.
                                              O’SHAUGHNESSY

                              CABERNET SAUVIGNON | HOWELL MOUNTAIN
  Approximately 85% cabernet sauvignon, 5% merlot, 5% St. Macaire, 3% malbec, and 2% petit verdot
O’Shaughnessy is a great example of dozens of tiny production cabernets made by family-owned wineries often
located high up in the mountains, a 30-minute drive, but a world away, from the valley’s main road—Highway 29.
(In the case of O’Shaughnessy, even a GPS won’t help you find it.) This is black bear, mountain lion, rattlesnake,
and hawk territory, and the wines often smell and taste of the rugged wild landscape that surrounds the small
vineyards. O’Shaughnessy makes two mountain cabernet sauvignons—one from Mount Veeder and one from
Howell Mountain, the latter on a site appropriately called El Rancho del Oso (“Ranch of the Bear”). And while I
have been astounded by the deliciousness of both, the Howell Mountain, with its deep exotic spiciness, almost furry
texture, and vivid black fig and cassis flavor, is the more hedonistic of the two. O’Shaughnessy may be the only
winery in the United States to have plantings of the rare ancient Bordeaux grape St. Macaire.
                                                 SCARECROW

                                                 RUTHERFORD
                                           100% cabernet sauvignon
Named after the scarecrow in The Wizard of Oz, Scarecrow comes from the historic J. J. Cohn estate, next door to
Inglenook, tucked up against the hills of the Mayacamas Mountains in Rutherford. The land was bought out of
bankruptcy in the 1930s by Joe Cohn, an immigrant Russian Orthodox Jew who made his way from Harlem, New
York, to Hollywood, eventually becoming the first head of MGM (the studio that produced the movie The Wizard of
Oz). The vines—planted in 1945—produced grapes that went into many of Napa Valley’s most prestigious wines
until 2003, when Cohn’s grandson, Bret Lopez, began making the first Scarecrow wines with the help of consulting
winemaker Celia Welch. From the first vintage, the wines have taken on near legendary status for their beauty (a
rare term in the world of powerful cabernet), immaculate purity, textural tenderness, and savory quality, not unlike
the wines of First Growth Château Haut-Brion.
                                                HARLAN ESTATE

                                                    OAKVILLE
  Cabernet sauvignon with small amounts of merlot, cabernet franc, and petit verdot sometimes added
Founded by Bill Harlan in 1984, Harlan Estate lies over the soft crests and slopes of a set of small hills edged up
against the Mayacamas Mountains, in the western part of Oakville. The hills form a silent promontory (with 360
degrees of exposition) poised above Napa Valley, 225 to 1,225 feet (69 to 373 meters) below. Standing in these
vineyards, you’re overtaken by the feeling that you have found yourself in an enchanting and spiritual place. The
wine is justifiably considered one of the greatest—if not the greatest—in the United States. Since it was first made,
it has garnered numerous 100-point scores by critics. It’s a subtle, immaculate wine of astounding beauty—a wine
that seems to insinuate itself into your senses so completely that you are left without words, but craving more.
Wines like this do not seem to be made as such, but rather, like Michelangelo’s Pietà, to emerge into the physical
world as everything nonessential is sculpted away.

                                              SWEET WINE
                                                      DOLCE

                                                  NAPA VALLEY
                                      80% sémillon, 20% sauvignon blanc
When it was created in 1985, by the late Gil Nickel and his partners (Nickel also founded Far Niente), Dolce
became a Napa Valley sensation—first, because the wine was so mind-bendingly decadent, and second, because
creating a late-harvest, botrytized wine in the manner of a great Sauternes was considered virtually impossible in
the dry climate of California. Nickel was not only undeterred, he was galvanized by the challenge. Today, Dolce is
the only winery in Napa Valley devoted exclusively to a single dessert wine. Great sweet wines are defined not by
their sweetness (a given) but by their balance and acidity. Dolce’s impeccable balance means the wine rolls over
your palate in waves of lusciousness. The wine is exceedingly difficult to make. It starts with a vineyard tucked into
a sheltered corner, so that fog settles and huddles there for hours each day (moisture is necessary for botrytis to
form). At harvest, vineyard workers using special shears cut out all berries that are not infected with botrytis mold
(sometimes a cluster provides a mere single usable berry). Because of the high sugar content of the juice,
fermentation takes half a year. But Dolce, with its grand Art Nouveau–inspired label and 22-karat gold lettering, is
a wine worthy of the complexity required to usher it into existence.
                                             CARNEROS
About 40 miles (64 kilometers) north of San Francisco, the AVA Carneros (also known as Los Carneros)
spans the southern ends of Napa and Sonoma counties, and includes just over thirty wineries and some
8,000 acres (3,200 hectares) of vineyards. It is a serene place. No towns, just softly loping, windswept
hills that, now vine-covered, were once the exclusive domain of sheep. (The word carneros is Spanish
for “rams.”)
   What makes Carneros special is its proximity to San Pablo Bay, which is the most northern part of San
Francisco Bay. It acts as a giant funnel for the cool ocean air and fog that surge through Carneros as
they are pulled up into the warmer Napa and Sonoma Valleys. The effect on the region’s vineyards is
profound. The grapes, while getting plenty of sun, rarely get too much warmth. Because of the constant
caress of cool air, the risk of flavors being baked out of the grapes is virtually nonexistent. As a result, the
wines—especially pinot noirs and chardonnays—often have gorgeous balance. While rich, the wines are
rarely fat, flaccid, or overwrought. One sip of Shafer’s Red Shoulder Ranch Chardonnay (from their
vineyard in Carneros) shows just how complex and lusciously refined the wines can be.
  The greatest number of the grapes grown in Carneros are either chardonnay or pinot noir, although
merlot, syrah, and several other grapes also grow here in warmer pockets. There are also two very
famous large vineyards here—the Hyde Vineyard (owned by Larry Hyde and Aubert de Villaine, of
Burgundy’s famous Domaine de la Romanée Conti) and Hudson Vineyards (owned by Lee Hudson).
Among the top-rated California wineries that buy grapes from one of these two prestigious vineyards are:
Marcassin, Kistler, Aubert, Paul Hobbs, Ramey, DuMOL, and HdV (the Hyde/deVillaine partnership.
   Not surprisingly for a cool region that specializes in chardonnay and pinot noir, some fantastic
sparkling wines are also made here, including several of the best in California. Among the sparkling wine
firms that are either located in or buy grapes from Carneros are Domaine Carneros, Mumm Napa Valley,
Gloria Ferrer, Domaine Chandon, and Schramsberg.
    The top two Carneros sparklers I find most impressive are both the California equivalents of prestige
cuvées and have spent six or more years aging on their yeast lees. They are: Domaine Carneros Le
Rêve, (le rêve is French for “the dream”—an apt name for this pristine and elegant bubbly) and the rich,
full-bodied Schramsberg J. Schram Reserve.
   Finally, historically, the wineries and grape growers of Carneros have undertaken an ambitious amount
of research, including research on dozens of different clones of pinot noir. In fact, as early as 1986, an
investigation into Carneros pinot noirs revealed that they shared specific flavor characteristics, namely
those of cherries, berry jam, cherry cola, and spice.
   My favorites among the top wineries in Carneros include: Acacia, Ancien, Ceja, Cuvaison Carneros
Estate, Domaine Carneros, Etude, Gloria Ferrer, HdV, Hudson Vineyards, Saintsbury, Schug, and
Truchard.
                               SONOMA COUNTY

Directly north of San Francisco and bordering the Pacific Ocean, Sonoma County has 1
million acres (404,700 hectares) of land, making it more than two times bigger than its
next-door neighbor, Napa Valley. Sonoma’s size means, among other things, that the
county is a geographical patchwork quilt of valleys, mountains, riverbeds, plains, and
slight uplifts in the terrain, known as benchlands. Within this shifting landscape are
sixteen viticultural areas that can be quite different in their nuances of climate and soil.
   From a historical, psychosocial, and cultural standpoint, Sonoma County is rather
different from Napa. Vineyards were planted here as the nineteenth century dawned, well
before they were planted in Napa, and many vintners and winemakers are members of old,
established farming families. A kicked-back country style pervades much of the region.
People drive around in dusty pickups, no one puts on the ritz very much, and when
Sonomans do get together, the talk is as likely to be about tractors as about wine sales in
Tokyo. But be assured, among the top producers there’s as much cutting-edge wine stuff
happening in Sonoma as anywhere in California.
    The county itself is beautifully pastoral, and is often called California’s Provence.
Vineyards alternate with apple orchards, vegetable farms, redwood forests, dairies (cheese
is a local specialty), sheep ranches, nurseries (including dozens of Christmas tree farms),
and even aquaculture fisheries along the rugged coast. Sonoma boasts one of the best
bakeries west of the Mississippi (the Downtown Bakery, in Healdsburg), the first
commercial shiitake mushroom farm in the United States, plus the Dry Creek General
Store, a funky, old-fashioned general store, but on Saturday night, if you’re single and in
the wine industry, count on it being the place to hang out (everyone sits on the front porch
and drinks beer).
       Perhaps the nearest I come to gluttony is with wine. As often as possible,
       when a really beautiful bottle is before me, I drink all of it I can, even when I
       know that I have had more than I want physically. That is gluttonous.
          But I think to myself, when again will I have this taste upon my tongue?
       Where else in the world is there just such a wine as this, with just this
       bouquet, at just this heat, in just this crystal cup? And when again will I be
       alive to it as I am this very minute, sitting here on the green hillside above the
       sea, or here in this dim, murmuring, richly odorous restaurant, or here in this
       fisherman’s café on the wharf? More, more I think—all of it to the last
       exquisite drop, for there is no satiety for me, nor ever has been in such
       drinking.
                                                               — M.F.K. FISHER,
        An Alphabet for Gourmets, 1949. Fisher lived in the Sonoma Valley for much
                                                                        of her life.

    A morning in Sonoma reveals why the region is special climatically. Soft white fog
rises in massive banks off the coast and drifts inland, wrapping itself around mountains,
filling the valleys and riverbeds with pillows of cool vapor. Sonoma is well known for the
daily ebb and flow—almost a yin and yang—of fog and sunshine. Of course, areas closer
to the coast (especially the AVAs Sonoma Coast and parts of the Russian River Valley)
tend to be somewhat cooler, while areas farther inland are warmer. But overall, what
makes Sonoma Sonoma is its pendulum-like climate of warm days and cool nights, the
classic scenario for grapes with the potential to mature evenly and fully.




Northwestern face of Camp Meeting Ridge—a chardonnay vineyard at 1,200 feet (400 meters) in the appellation known
as the Sonoma Coast. The vineyard belongs to Flowers Vineyard and Winery, one of the early pioneers of the appellation
                       which, as the name implies, is strung out along Sonoma’s Pacific coast.
                                       THE NAME SONOMA
  There are many legends concerning the origin of the name Sonoma. According to Arthur Dawson, in The
  Stories Behind Sonoma Valley Place Names, the most frequent of these is that the word sonoma means
  “valley of the moon.” This was the translation given by General Mariano Vallejo, the Mexican commander
  of the northern territories in the 1840s, when what is now California was taken over by the United States.
  Vallejo reportedly said that sono meant “moon” in Suisan, the language of a Native American tribe that
  lived not in Sonoma but in Napa Valley. It appears that Vallejo may have simply liked the idea of this
  meaning, since the general wrote admiringly of how full moons seemed to rise and set several times over
  Sonoma’s eastern hills. Then there’s the Pinocchio version: Sono supposedly also means “nose.” As this
  legend goes, a Native American servant in the Vallejo household told of a time long before the arrival of
  Spaniards and Mexicans in California, when a baby with an especially large nose was born. The baby
  grew up to be chief of the tribe, and thus sonoma came to mean “the land of Chief Big Nose.” The most
  likely interpretation, according to Dawson, is based on the work of early twentieth-century
  anthropologists, who noted that sonoma is a common Wappo suffix appearing at the end of village
  names. The Wappo tribe is thought to have occupied Sonoma before being pushed out by other tribes
  and relocating in what became known as Napa Valley. According to Laura Somersal, the last fluent
  speaker of Wappo, who died in 1990, sonoma meant “abandoned camping place.”




 A winemaker’s hands tell the story of painstaking work. Here, Don Van Staaveren, who helped his wife, the winemaker
          Margo Van Staaveren, create the famous Chateau St. Jean cabernet blend called Cinq Cépages.

    Sonoma County is not known for one or two grape varieties in the way Napa is
renowned for cabernet sauvignon, or Amador County is noted for zinfandel. Instead,
Sonoma’s size and generally propitious climate, coupled with its highly variable
topography and changes in altitude, mean that many different varieties do well here—in
fact, fifty different grapes are grown in the region. Which place they are grown in, of
course, is the key. Over the past two decades, Sonoma’s viticultural areas—like
viticultural areas throughout much of California—have become increasingly specialized as
vintners understand the fine points of matching grape variety to site. Today, Alexander
Valley, a warm interior valley, is prized for its soft cabernet sauvignons; and the county’s
cooler coastal areas, such as Russian River Valley and Sonoma Coast, are known for what,
in great years, can be elegantly complex pinot noirs, as well as chardonnays; and no one
would dispute that Dry Creek Valley is one of California’s centers for zinfandel.
   According to some historians, Sonoma’s first vineyards were not planted by Spaniards
but by Russian fishermen who, around the beginning of the nineteenth century, hunted
otters and seals and established a community on the coast near Fort Ross (said to be
derived from their name for their homeland—Rossiya).




    By 1820, the Spanish were in on the act. Franciscan fathers planted vineyards
surrounding their northernmost mission, the Mission San Francisco Solano, which today
still stands in the town of Sonoma. The missions were eventually appropriated by the
Mexican government (Mexico won its independence and laid claim to California in the
Mexican War of Independence in 1821), but in just over two decades, in 1846, the whole
of California was annexed by the United States and made a state in 1850. During this time
of political instability, cuttings from Sonoma’s vines were planted throughout northern
California.
    But Sonoma’s role as the cradle of northern viticulture was to be even more solidly
established once Agoston Haraszthy (HARASS-thee), the “Father of the California Wine
Industry,” arrived on the scene. Haraszthy—a cross between Indiana Jones, James Bond,
and Thomas Jefferson—was a Hungarian wheeler-dealer who made and lost his fortune
multiple times. Haraszthy thought big, and in 1857 he established Buena Vista, which,
with 300 acres (120 hectares) of vineyards, was the largest winery in the state at the time.
One of Haraszthy’s other coups was to convince the nascent California legislature to send
him to Europe, where he studied viticulture, ultimately returning to Sonoma in 1861 with
100,000 French, German, Spanish, and Italian vine cuttings. Haraszthy considered
Sonoma a viticultural paradise, and his promotion of it was so effective that within a few
years, land prices jumped from $6 to $150 an acre as waves of French, German, and
Italian wine-makers moved into the region.
   Among the Italians who ultimately moved into Sonoma were a couple of brothers who,
after reading a book on winemaking borrowed from the public library, went on to build
America’s best-known and largest wine brand—E. & J. Gallo. As poor, hardworking
young men coming of age at the end of Prohibition, Ernest and Julio Gallo began their
winery in the farm town of Modesto, in California’s hot Central Valley. Early on, however,
the brothers became convinced that Sonoma was where the state’s best wines would
eventually be made. Year by year, they bought increasing amounts of Sonoma grapes to
use as top-flight blending material in their regular wines. By the time the Gallos launched
their expensive, ultrapremium, small-production wines in 1993 (a $60 cabernet and a $30
chardonnay; extraordinary prices at the time), they owned 4,000 acres (1,600 hectares) in
Sonoma.
                         THE KNIGHT OF KNIGHTS VALLEY
 Next door to Sonoma’s Alexander Valley is Knights Valley, which has its own knight, Sir Peter Michael.
 One of England’s early tech entrepreneurs, Michael founded Micro Consultants Group and UEI Plc, as
 well as Cosworth Engineering. In 1972, he opened shop in California’s Silicon Valley, founding Quantel, a
 digital special effects company, whose product Paintbox revolutionized television and film graphics. While
 in Silicon Valley, Michael fell in love with California, ultimately buying 600 acres of land in Knights Valley
 in 1982 and establishing his namesake winery. In 1989, Michael was knighted by Queen Elizabeth II,
 joining the ranks of former president George Bush, Hollywood director Steven Spielberg, and software
 tycoon Bill Gates. The winery, tucked up into the steep, twisting, volcanic canyons on the western face of
 Mount St. Helena, has developed a cult following for its six expensive but immaculately precise and
 complex vineyard-designated chardonnays, all of which are considered among the most extraordinary in
 California, and all of which have French names—Belle Côte (“Beautiful Slope”), Mon Plaisir (“My
 Pleasure”), La Carrière (“The Quarry”), Ma Belle-Fille (“My Daughter-in-Law”), Cuvée Indigène
 (“Indigenous Blend”), and Point Rouge (“Red Dot”). The winery’s main Bordeaux-style red blend, Les
 Pavots (“The Poppies”), is often mistaken for a Napa Valley cabernet because of its depth, complexity,
 and structure.

   Sonoma County’s long history lives on today in the old vineyards to be found there.
Sonoma, along with the Sierra Foothills, is home to more old vineyards than any other
wine region in California. Such vineyards are extremely special and historically important,
for they were planted with clones of grapes—especially clones of zinfandel—that have, as
a result of more than a century of natural adaptation, developed their own personalities
and unique flavors.

SONOMA COUNTY AVAS
Of the sixteen AVAs within Sonoma, the most important are Alexander Valley; Russian
River Valley (within which are the AVAs Green Valley and Chalk Hill); Dry Creek Valley;
Sonoma Coast (inside of which is the AVA Fort Ross-Seaview); and Sonoma Valley (with
its smaller AVA Sonoma Mountain). Carneros (which straddles Sonoma and Napa
counties) is addressed on page 705.
   Alexander Valley, at the northern end of Sonoma County, is a long, warm, inland
corridor of vines. If you arrived there for the first time around 3:00 p.m. on a summer
afternoon, you’d swear the valley was one of the hotter places in northern California. But
you’d be right only until twilight. As night approaches, the valley cools down
considerably, thanks to the Russian River (which runs through the valley) and the fog that
snakes its way up and down the river’s basin. Generally, the fog wallows along the river
until it is burned off by the strong morning sun. This is cabernet sauvignon territory,
although some powerful, full-bodied chardonnays are also made here, including
Stonestreet and Chateau St. Jean’s Belle Terre Vineyard chardonnay. Among the wineries
that make top cabernet sauvignons from Alexander Valley are Silver Oak (which also
makes cabernet sauvignon in Napa Valley), Lancaster Estate, Jordan, and for good value,
Geyser Peak.
   After flowing down through Alexander Valley, the Russian River makes a few hairpin
turns and then starts flowing westward through the valley that takes its name. Most of
Russian River Valley and the smaller viticultural area inside it, Green Valley, is the
opposite of Alexander Valley. Generally speaking, these regions are quite cool (parts of
both are less than 10 miles/16 kilometers from the Pacific Ocean), and as a result, pinot
noir and chardonnay are the prominent grape varieties.
    Pinot noir, of course, is difficult, moody, delicious. But despite the grape’s irascible
nature, the pinots from this part of Sonoma can have extraordinary balance and
complexity, as one sip of Williams Selyem, Kosta Browne, DuMol, or Rochioli—all
Russian River pinots to die for—will attest. As for chardonnay, very good versions abound
here, and those from Williams Selyem and Lewis can be spellbinding. Finally, while the
Russian River Valley isn’t famous for sauvignon blanc, two of the best sauvignon blancs
in the state come from here: Merry Edwards and Rochioli.




   Pinot noir and chardonnay are king and queen in Russian River Valley, together making
up a whopping 70 percent of all plantings. The cool climate and coastal fog that travel
from the Pacific directly through the Petaluma wind gap provide an ideal climate for
making distinct, expressive wines. Indeed, once the evening fog rolls in, the air
temperature in Russian River Valley can drop 35° to 40°F (20° to 22°C). This natural air
conditioning slows ripening and lengthens the growing season by as much as 20 percent
compared to neighboring areas. The soils in Russian River Valley are varied, but the most
prized is Goldridge—a fine, sandy loam with excellent drainage and low soil fertility. The
central part of the region contains clay, and the river benchlands are alluvial soil.
   Given so much high-quality pinot noir and chardonnay, plus the region’s cool
temperature, it comes as no surprise that some of Sonoma County’s finest sparkling wines,
including the two best, those from J Vineyards and Winery and Iron Horse, are also made
from Russian River or Green Valley grapes.
   Among the top wineries making wines from the Russian River Valley and Green Valley
are Davis Bynum, Joseph Swan, Merry Edwards, Iron Horse, Lewis, Paul Hobbs,
Rochioli, Kistler, Kosta Browne, Marimar Estate, DeLoach, DuMOL, and Williams
Selyem.
   Perhaps the most charming viticultural area of all in Sonoma County is Dry Creek
Valley. Time seems to have stood still here. The gently rolling, blond hills are dotted with
old, gnarled vines (there are many old vineyards) that lift their twisted black arms skyward
as though they were imploring heaven. Due west of Alexander Valley, Dry Creek Valley is
a zinfandel paradise. Other wines are made here—including some good cabernets and
Rhône blends—but zinfandel is the variety through which the earth speaks most
compellingly. Some Dry Creek zinfandels are big and meaty, others, soft and graceful.
What the best of them share is a sensual richness of flavor that can be irresistible. Among
the Dry Creek producers to look for: A. Rafanelli, Seghesio, Mauritson, and Ridge.
   Sonoma’s largest appellation (750 square miles/1,940 square kilometers), but the one
least planted with vineyards, is Sonoma Coast, which stretches south from Mendocino all
the way to just north of San Francisco, and from the Pacific coastline inland for 40 miles
(64 kilometers) at its widest point. Importantly, several prominent, small vintners opposed
the boundaries of this AVA, saying that it was too large to be meaningful. They then
formed an association called West Sonoma Coast Vintners, made up of wineries within
what they call the “true” Sonoma Coast, an area west of local Highway 16, from the town
of Petaluma north to Annapolis. Here, on the edge of the Pacific Ocean, some of the
coolest (and best) vineyards have an ocean view, although many sit on rocky hillsides
above the fog line—a critical fact, for this close to the ocean, it’s important to catch every
possible ray of sun if grapes are to ripen. Even so, Sonoma Coast viticulture is risky. As a
result of the ocean’s proximity, there’s twice as much rainfall here as in other parts of
Sonoma.
    Once grazing land buffeted by high winds, the western part of Sonoma Coast was
historically thought to be too cold for grapes. But in the 1990s and 2000s, several pioneers
in the region—Mike Bohan (Bohan Ranch), David Hirsch (Hirsch Vineyards), Ted Lemon
(Littorai), Burt Williams (Williams Selyem), Steve Kistler (Kistler Vineyards), Greg La
Follette (then at Flowers), Ehren Jordan (Failla), and Andy Peay (Peay Vineyards), among
others, began planting pinot noir and chardonnay, with beautiful results. Today, syrah is
also planted here, and those wines can be stunning and packed with spice.
   Within Sonoma Coast is the especially prestigious, small AVA of Fort Ross-Seaview, a
high-altitude coastal area that’s home to some of Sonoma’s best wineries, including Peay,
Hirsch, and Flowers. In addition, the top wineries Failla, Marcassin, Peter Michael, and
Martinelli all have vineyards here.
   Finally, the AVA Sonoma Valley and its smaller AVA Sonoma Mountain are in the
southern part of Sonoma County, edged up against the Mayacamas Mountains. This is
where viticulture in northern California began. Sonoma Valley is anything but your
conventional valley. The topography, much of it spread over the foothills of the
Mayacamas Mountains, rises and dips over knolls and glens with such fanciful names as
Valley of the Moon and Glen Ellen. Sonoma Valley is a wonderful mishmash, both
geographically and climatically. Given the total variability of the region, many different
varieties of grapes are grown here and made into a scrumptious grab bag of wines. Among
the best things to taste are the structured, complex cabernets from Laurel Glen, the
zinfandels from Ridge, the pinot noirs from Hanzell, and the chardonnays from Kistler.
                    WHEN YOU VISIT… SONOMA
BEFITTING ITS NICKNAME as California’s “Provence,” Sonoma County is full of small
towns that sell local cheeses, olive oils, honey, fruits, and vegetables. In particular, don’t
miss both Healdsburg and Sonoma, wonderful historic towns built around charming
squares filled with boutiques and great small restaurants like The Girl & the Fig, a
Sonoma must.
THE WINERIES OF SONOMA are not neatly lined up along a single main road, but
instead are spread all over the county, so count on following lots of twisting country
roads. Reservations at wineries are suggested.
TO GET A GREAT understanding of the impact of viticulture on wine flavor, visit the
Benziger Family Winery, which has what is possibly the state’s best tour geared
specifically to biodynamic viticulture.
                            The Sonoma Wines to Know
                                                     WHITES




                                                       SCRIBE

                                               RIESLING | SONOMA
                                                     100% riesling
The number of great rieslings in California could charitably be counted on two hands, leading many wine
professionals to conclude that the Golden State just isn’t very golden when it comes to riesling. That certainly was
my opinion, too. Until I tasted Scribe. Here is a bone-dry riesling of restraint, elegance, and purity, recalling the dry
rieslings of Australia. How the three young men who started Scribe packed this Sonoma wine with such Audrey
Hepburn–like grace is a mystery, but they did. (Don’t miss their elegant pinot noir, either.)
                                                 HANZELL
                                      CHARDONNAY | SONOMA VALLEY
                                                100% chardonnay
Founded in 1953 by Ambassador James Zellerbach (who helped craft the Marshall Plan for Europe after World War
II), Hanzell has been a Sonoma blue-chip estate for decades. The chardonnays have special renown—and
deservedly so. They are not modern in style—no obvious oak, heavy butter, or discernible sweetness. Instead, the
wine is one beautiful sweep of cream and minerals, seamlessly stitched together. The wine’s enticing choreography
starts quietly, then builds with luscious intensity. I can’t resist thinking of this as Sonoma’s version of a Puligny-
Montrachet.




                                  PETER MICHAEL WINERY
                             CHARDONNAY | MON PLAISIR | KNIGHTS VALLEY
                                                100% chardonnay
Peter Michael has a stellar reputation for its six separate chardonnays, each from a different vineyard, the most
lovely of which is often the Mon Plaisir (French for “my pleasure”). Although, I would never pass up a glass of La
Carrière or Belle Côte, its sisters. In top years Mon Plaisir is hauntingly elegant and seamless, with rich, high-
definition fruit. A chardonnay of exquisite style.

                                                      REDS
                                                      FAILLA

                           PINOT NOIR | HIRSCH VINEYARDS | SONOMA COAST
                                                  100% pinot noir
Business partners Ehren Jordan and Anne-Marie Failla (FAY-la), owners of Failla winery, make a handful of
exquisite pinot noirs from high-elevation, ocean-air-cooled vineyards along the “true” Sonoma Coast. These are
wines of purity and pinpoint elegance, with mouthwatering juiciness. (This graceful pinot noir from the Hirsch
Vineyards is a knockout, and a favorite.) Neither Jordan, whose degrees are in art history and classical architecture,
nor Failla, whose background is in banking, have formal credentials in winemaking. But they appear to have
something even better—a genius for their craft.




                                              WILLIAMS SELYEM

                PINOT NOIR | EASTSIDE ROAD NEIGHBORS | RUSSIAN RIVER VALLEY
                                                  100% pinot noir
I’ve followed Williams Selyem from its early days, when Burt Williams and Ed Selyem—down-home, seemingly
run-of-the-mill guys—were making a few hundred cases of decidedly not run-of-the-mill pinot noir (and
astounding the pinot noir universe in the process), to the winery’s purchase by John and Kathe Dyson in 1998. For a
while then, Williams Selyem lost its way. But for the past half decade the winery (now making fourteen pinot noirs)
is back in top form. Evidence: this Eastside Road Neighbors pinot, a long, structured, sensual, nicely sweaty red,
laced with spicy notes. When you drink this pinot, its flavors just keep coming at you like waves on the beach.
(“Eastside Road Neighbors” refers to the four vineyards along Eastside Road in the Russian River Valley, from
which the grapes are sourced.) The winery also makes a delicious chardonnay—the unoaked one—that’s as fresh as
a cold-moving mountain stream.
                                                 ROCHIOLI
                            PINOT NOIR | RESERVE | RUSSIAN RIVER VALLEY
                                                  100% pinot noir
Generally one of the most massive, saturated, and intense pinot noirs in Sonoma, Rochioli’s reserve, with its
opulent, dark, almost brooding berry flavors and utterly supple texture, can be a mind-blower. The Rochioli family
has been growing grapes in Sonoma since the 1930s, but it wasn’t until the 1980s that they began making their own
wines. The grapes for this wine come from the family’s West Block vineyard—about 500 yards (460 meters) from
the Russian River—as well as from their Sweetwater Vineyard, named for the many natural springs in the area.




                                           RADIO-COTEAU
                                  SYRAH | LAS COLINAS | SONOMA COAST
                                                    100% syrah
Every time I drink Radio-Coteau, I picture—what else?—an old-style radio, and indeed, with Las Colinas (“the
hill”), the volume dial is turned on very high. There’s a gorgeousness to this syrah, and its vivid, spiced and peppery
raspberry character is intense. Of course, the wine has richness and superb density, but it’s the way the flavor
appears to float, without weight, that’s magical. This is always one of the best syrahs in California. The name
Radio-Coteau, by the way, is an expression from the northern Rhône region of France that literally means
“broadcasting from the hillside,” and when used colloquially, means “word of mouth.”
                                            A. RAFANELLI
                                      INFANDEL | DRY CREEK VALLEY
                                  Mostly zinfandel with a touch of petite sirah
The Rafanelli family’s zinfandels have a way, over time, of making you crave them. The best are deep, generous,
totally alive with flavor, and have a sensual softness that you could lose yourself in. Yet despite their obvious
textural appeal, these are zinfandels of structure and ageworthiness. The Rafanellis own zinfandel vineyards that
have been in existence for close to a century.




                                                   RIDGE
                              ZINFANDEL | PONZO | RUSSIAN RIVER VALLEY
                                 Approximately 95% zinfandel, 5% petite sirah
Zinfandel is compelling for many reasons—but one of them is not elegance, not usually. But with Ponzo, Ridge (a
winery that makes twelve separate zinfandels) has achieved the nearly impossible—a wine of exquisite beauty,
dimension, and structure. This is a zinfandel that soars with vivid strawberry, cranberry, and spice flavors, a
zinfandel that has complex herb and savory notes. It’s a bit like drinking Thanksgiving. Ponzo is a reference to Bob
Ponzo, the owner of Ponzo Vineyard, who has proven that a so-called warm-climate grape like zinfandel can be
magically refined when grown in a slightly cooler place, like the Russian River Valley.
                                              SILVER OAK
                              CABERNET SAUVIGNON | ALEXANDER VALLEY
                                           100% cabernet sauvignon
Although the winery itself is located in Napa Valley, Silver Oak makes two different, famous cabernet sauvignons,
one from Napa Valley (the more structured) and the other from its vineyards in Sonoma’s Alexander Valley
(possibly a shade more plump and hedonistic). Immensely popular and stamped with lots of vanilla (thanks to its
aging in American oak), the Alexander Valley cabernet is captivating, full of energy, and easy to love. Year in and
year out, the texture of this cabernet is as irresistible as homemade jam that’s just been taken off the stove.
                                        CHATEAU ST. JEAN
                                     CINQ CÉPAGES | SONOMA COUNTY
     Differing percentages each year of cabernet sauvignon, merlot, cabernet franc, petit verdot, and
                                                malbec
Cinq Cépages (French for “five grape varieties”) is so big that I’m often tempted to dismiss it as too much. But
then, like some huge, adorable sheepdog that keeps putting its nose in your hand, it just won’t go away. For all of its
ripeness and power, the wine fills the palate and moves with great waves of fruit, spice, and briaryness. It is a slam-
dunk kind of cabernet and one that would meet filet mignon head on. Chateau St. Jean, founded in 1973 near the
tiny town of Kenwood, is one of the most impressive estates in Sonoma. The 1920s-era château on the property
(once a private family home) is on the National Trust for Historic Preservation. Cinq Cépages, and all of Chateau
St. Jean’s distinctive wines, have been made for the past thirty-three-plus years by Margo Van Staaveren.




The old village of Mendocino in Mendocino County was once a small whaling port. Today it is a very low-key artists’
                                                   hamlet.
                                  MENDOCINO

California’s two most northern wine regions, Mendocino and Lake County, are just north
of Sonoma and Napa counties, but they are light-years away in temperament and style.
The vast, ravishing wilderness here, and tranquil, almost reckless beauty is the California
of a century ago. Rolling mountains covered in golden grasses and wild oats alternate with
immense stands of giant redwoods. In Mendocino, more than a million acres (more than
400,000 hectares) of forest stand majestically amid the vine-covered, sun-dappled hills.
Orchards and ranches are sprinkled over the landscape. On the coast, the windswept town
of Mendocino is an artists’ hamlet. Mendocino has the largest percentage of organic
vineyards of any county in California—nearly 30 percent are certified by the California
Certified Organic Farmers—and countless others are organic but not certified.

      The word mendocino is a diminutive of de Mendoza, the name of one of the
      earliest Spanish explorers to come ashore in Mendocino, in the late sixteenth
      century.
                             AMERICA’S FINEST BRANDY
 In 1982, American Ansley Coale and Frenchman Hubert Germain-Robin founded the artisanal distillery
 Germain-Robin near the town of Ukiah, in Mendocino. Today, Germain-Robin’s brandies are considered
 the best brandies made in the United States and have, in multiple blind tastings, repeatedly bested a
 host of Cognacs.
    To make these brandies, Hubert Germain-Robin, a master Cognac distiller whose family has produced
 Cognac since 1782, uses an antique alembic still. Each year, he hand-distills eighty barrels of brandy
 from such premium grapes as pinot noir and sauvignon blanc (in Cognac and elsewhere in Europe,
 brandies are usually distilled from lesser grape varieties). Of the five brandies Germain-Robin makes, the
 most stunning is the XO Reserve, a brandy so smooth, elegant, and lush it can leave you speechless.


   Mendocino’s jagged, almost menacing coastline has been carved out over eons by icy,
dark-blue waters. Farther inland, in the middle of Lake County, the grand body of water
known as Clear Lake is the largest natural lake in California. On any given day in these
two regions you’re more likely to see a whale, mountain lion, or rattlesnake than someone
in a business suit. Indeed, when the sixties ended in San Francisco, some “flower
children” simply dropped out of city life and moved north to the backwoods of Mendocino
(today, besides grapes, marijuana is a popular crop). In this section, I’ll focus on
Mendocino, the more significant of the two wine regions. Lake County is addressed in the
box above.
   The first small wineries in Mendocino were established in the 1850s by failed
prospectors turned farmers, in the wake of the Gold Rush. But by the end of Prohibition,
virtually every winery had disappeared, and pear orchards or nut trees stood where
vineyards had once flourished. The two counties, so rugged and remote, were not quick to
be reborn as wine regions. As of 1967, there was only one winery in Mendocino
(Parducci), even though the wine business was beginning to take off in both Napa and
Sonoma. The next year, however, proved to be a turning point. In 1968, Mendocino’s
Fetzer Vineyards was founded by lumber executive Barney Fetzer. Fetzer’s growth was
meteoric. During the decade of the 1980s, ten of Barney Fetzer’s eleven children built the
family winery into one of the largest in California. Although Fetzer Vineyards is now
owned by Chile’s huge wine firm Concha y Toro, the Fetzer family continues to hold
prime vineyard land in Mendocino.
                                          LAKE COUNTY
 Taking its name from Clear Lake (the largest natural lake in California), Lake County is smaller, drier, and
 less diverse than Mendocino. There are 8,400 acres (3,400 hectares) of vineyard in Lake County, but just
 over thirty wineries, most of which focus on relatively inexpensive cabernet sauvignons and sauvignon
 blancs that are often just simple and serviceable. On the other hand, this is where stunning bargains can
 be found—like Six Sigma’s Cuvée Diamond Mine, a delicious blend of cabernet sauvignon and
 tempranillo that tastes like it ought to cost a whole lot more than it does. Other wineries have paid close
 attention to the deals that can be made here. Indeed, Lake County is primarily a provider of grapes to a
 number of huge wineries, including Beringer, Sutter Home, and Kendall-Jackson (which began here).
    Lake County’s first important vineyards were cultivated by the enterprising English actress Lillie
 Langtry, who planted the hillsides of her remote estate in the 1880s, intending to make what she hoped
 would become “the greatest claret in California.” The vineyards ultimately became a part of the winery
 called Guenoc, now known as Langtry Estate & Vineyard. The other notable Lake County winery, Steele
 Wines, is owned by Jed Steele, a well-known and highly respected winemaker who, as the wine-maker
 at Kendall-Jackson in the 1980s and early 1990s, established the Kendall-Jackson style of soft, round,
 easy-drinking chardonnay. Under four different labels, including Steele and Shooting Star, Steele makes
 some fifty different wines from varieties as diverse as aligoté and counoise, as well as exciting, well-
 priced old-vine zinfandels.




    Mendocino’s simple beauty remains unspoiled. A large percentage of vineyards here are farmed organically.

   Thus, Mendocino became home to one of California’s most technologically
sophisticated large wineries. Surrounding it are some ninety smaller wineries, plus about
345 grape growers who range from modern, large-scale operators to tiny, one-man
operations where the last technological innovation might well have been replacing the
horse with a tractor. Today there are just over 17,000 acres (6,880 hectares) of vineyards in
Mendocino, and the leading grape varieties are chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon. That
said, some terrific pinot noir is beginning to be made here, too (especially in Mendocino’s
Anderson Valley). Mendocino is also where you’ll find one of the producers of
California’s most stunning, complex sparkling wines—Roederer Estate—plus Germain-
Robin brandy, considered the finest brandy made in the United States.
   California’s giant redwoods—a state treasure. Many of Mendocino’s best vineyard areas are surrounded by these
   majestic trees, which can reach 367 feet (112 meters) in height and have a width of 22 feet (7 meters) at the base.

   Mendocino stretches from the cool Pacific coast inland to several warmer wine valleys
tucked between the coastal mountain range and the Mayacamas. The headwaters of the
powerful Russian River are located here and flow down through Mendocino and much of
Sonoma County before curving abruptly and spilling into the Pacific Ocean. Within
Mendocino are several smaller AVAs, the most important of which is Anderson Valley.

ANDERSON VALLEY
Slicing like a fjord inland from the cold sea, Anderson Valley, especially its northwestern
end, is one of the chilliest grape-growing areas in California. Chardonnay and pinot noir
are the leading grapes, with, in particular, wineries such as Goldeneye, Baxter, Williams
Selyem, Littorai, and Husch making fantastic pinots from Anderson Valley grapes. Not
surprisingly, pinot and chardonnay are blended by Roederer Estate (owned by the
Champagne house Louis Roederer) to make some of the raciest sparkling wines in
California.
   Before it bought land in Anderson Valley in 1981, the house of Louis Roederer
searched for several years for the perfect sparkling wine site in California. Roederer was
so convinced that Anderson Valley was that place that it waited seven years—until its own
vineyards matured—before making its first sparkler, instead of buying grapes from
someplace else.
                    Winter blankets Mariah Vineyards’ high-elevation zinfandel vines.

   Anderson Valley’s dramatic coolness means the region is also ideal for two grapes that
other parts of California have largely given up on, gewürztraminer and riesling. The most
hedonistic and exciting gewürztraminers and rieslings in California are made here by
Navarro Vineyards.
   Like Sonoma’s Russian River Valley, Mendocino’s cool Anderson Valley has some
warm spots. High above the chilly and often foggy valley are mountain ridges directly
exposed to the warm sun. The grapes for some of Mendocino’s top berry-and-spice
zinfandels come from vineyards here, especially Mendocino Ridge, composed of disparate
mountain areas, and the first noncontiguous AVA in California.
                WHEN YOU VISIT… MENDOCINO
BESIDES BEING HOME to a slew of laid-back wineries, Mendocino in particular is full
of zany things to do. You may want to crack, slurp, and sip your way through the
Mendocino Crab and Wine Days festival (in January), check out the whale festival
(usually in March, when the whales are running off the coast), taste through the self-
proclaimed world’s largest salmon barbecue (in July), take in the Paul Bunyan parade
(on Labor Day), or go for a vegetarian lunch at the City of Ten Thousand Buddhas, the
largest Buddhist monastery in California. For a full calendar of events, contact the Fort
Bragg Mendocino Coast Chamber of Commerce.
    The Mendocino and Lake County Wines to Know
                                          SPARKLING WINE




                                              ROEDERER ESTATE

                                 BRUT | ANDERSON VALLEY, MENDOCINO
                                Approximately 60% chardonnay, 40% pinot noir
I drink this wine about once a week, and would happily drink it every day if there weren’t so many other wines in
the world to taste. The wine’s wonderful play of creamy yet spiky textures, the apple Danish, limey flavors, and the
overall impeccable focus and clarity of the wine all add up to a completely satisfying experience and one of the best
ways possible to greet six o’clock after a long workday.

                                                   WHITES




                                                 LA FOLLETTE

                     CHARDONNAY | MANCHESTER RIDGE | MENDOCINO COUNTY
                                                100% chardonnay
From a coastal plateau 2,000 feet (610 meters) above the adjacent Mendocino shoreline comes this beautifully
elegant chardonnay with its lovely custard and crème brûlée notes, and merest hint of enticing spice. I especially
love the wine’s vividness—the result of a fresh, tactile backdrop of acidity. And that, in turn, probably comes from
the cold Pacific breezes that cool this vineyard every day.
                                     NAVARRO VINEYARDS
                        GEWÜRZTRAMINER | ANDERSON VALLEY, MENDOCINO
                                             100% gewürztraminer
Navarro makes the most sophisticated, complex, and delicious dry gewürztraminers in California. Vintage after
vintage, they are wines of remarkable clarity, precision, and pizzazz. Pears, tangerines, stones, minerals, and
lychees come at you in what can only be described as a driving rainstorm of flavor. Navarro first planted
gewürztraminer grapes in 1974, and has since developed a cult following for the wine it produces.

                                                     REDS




                                                PHILLIPS HILL

                   PINOT NOIR | OPPENLANDER VINEYARD | MENDOCINO COUNTY
                                                 100% pinot noir
Here’s a beautiful pinot noir for people who like pinot noir the old-fashioned way—earthy and graceful. And in the
case of this wine, with a subtle exotic character, not unlike Darjeeling tea. Phillips Hill is owned by Toby Hill, a
formally trained artist whose study of composition in the abstract eventually found its physical grounding when Hill
decided to reinvent himself by making wine. The Oppenlander Vineyard is just 10 miles (16 kilometers) from the
ocean.
                                                GOLDENEYE
                              PINOT NOIR | ANDERSON VALLEY, MENDOCINO
                                                   100% pinot noir
Goldeneye, owned by the same partners that own Napa Valley’s Duckhorn Vineyards, began making pinot noir in
Anderson Valley in 1997, and they quickly set about making a style that’s different from that of most of their
neighbors. This is not delicate, ethereally light pinot noir, but rather, dense, saturated pinot with a texture that’s
thick and velvety, with spicy, wood-smoke aromas and flavors. To me, this is pinot noir for the wintertime, when
there’s a fire in the fireplace and a roast in the oven.




                                                  LANGTRY
              PETITE SIRAH | SERPENTINE MEADOW | GUENOC VALLEY, LAKE COUNTY
                                                  100% petite sirah
Langtry’s petite sirah smells like chocolate truffles dusted in dirt—it’s a great smell! Black in color, dense in flavor,
packed with fruit, gripped by tannin and bold in intent, this wine is classic petite sirah. Serpentine Meadow—a
vineyard at 1,000 feet (305 meters) in elevation—is just a tiny part of the 21,000-acre (8,500-hectare) Langtry
Estate.
                                                     STEELE
                                    PERSONA NON GRATA | LAKE COUNTY
          50% syrah, about 20% each of zinfandel and petite sirah, plus barbera and petit verdot
As one might imagine, Persona Non Grata has something to say—even something to prove. This wine soars all
over the palate. It’s bold and rugged and the flavors come fast and dense, with no elegance whatsoever—just a
dagger of intense fruit. When I first tasted this wine I thought of the miners during the Gold Rush, and thought that
this was the kind of wine they might have drunk. But on reflection, I think the miners would have felt they’d died
and gone to heaven if they had something this good lying around ready to gulp down. The back label of this wine
acknowledges that, despite the quality of the grapes grown in Lake County, the region remains unknown. Steele
writes, “In drinking and enjoying this wine, you will be helping us to shed the chains that have for so long bound us
in the role of ‘Persona Non Grata.’”

                                                SWEET WINE




                                              NAVARRO VINEYARDS

     MUSCAT BLANC | CLUSTER SELECT LATE HARVEST | ANDERSON VALLEY, MENDOCINO
                                         100% muscat blanc à petits grains
This may well be the most lovely dessert wine made in the United States. It’s not super syrupy, not opulent, not
oozing with honey. It’s more like the Audrey Hepburn of dessert wines, the liquid version of pure, pristine, sweet
fresh fruit. I love the sense of minerals in this wine and the way it lifts off the palate with zesty tangerine and lime
flavors. A sensational bottle to have at the end of a meal with nothing more than some soft cheese.
                        THE SIERRA FOOTHILLS

Until the mid-nineteenth century, California’s wine industry was centered around Los
Angeles. But in 1849, with the discovery of gold near the town of Coloma, in the Sierra
Nevada foothills, the wine industry took off in a new direction. Mining camps sprang up
everywhere, and in their wake, so did vineyards and small wineries begun mostly by
immigrants seeking their fortunes. By the 1860s, there were nearly 200,000 vines growing
in the “gold counties” of northern California, and wineries there outnumbered those in
other parts of the north. These were the first wineries in the state to forgo the common
mission grape in favor of better varieties, such as zinfandel.
   In time, the gold supply diminished and eventually dried up. The population shrank.
Winemaking and grape growing slowed considerably and then, following the double
blows of phylloxera and Prohibition, virtually disappeared in some areas. By the end of
World War II, the Sierra Foothills were home mostly to ghost wineries and abandoned
vineyards. Only one winery managed to remain continuously in operation, the D’Agostini
Winery, now the Sobon Estate, in Amador County.
   A renaissance began in the 1970s, and today there are some one hundred wineries in the
Sierra Foothills and more than 6,400 acres (2,600 hectares) planted with vines.
   The region known as the Sierra Foothills is a strip of eight remote counties roughly
stacked one on top of the next, from north to south. California’s capital, Sacramento, is to
the west, the Nevada border to the east. Of the eight counties, the two most important are
El Dorado and Amador, ruggedly beautiful regions where the spirit of the Old West and a
strong sense of individualism live on.
   El Dorado, a mountainous region with mostly volcanic and granitic soils, has some of
the highest-elevation vineyards in California, including what is thought to be the highest
of all, Madroña Vineyards, at an elevation of 3,000 feet (900 meters). Thanks to the
breezes that sweep down off the 10,000-foot (3,000-meter) peaks of the Sierra Nevada,
nights here are very cool. Amador County, warmer than El Dorado, is spread over lower
foothills composed of granite with some sandy loam. Amador first came onto the modern
scene in the 1970s with gutsy, teeth-staining, King Kong–size zinfandels that lots of red
wine drinkers immediately fell in love with. The intensely flavored grapes came from very
old (often pre-Prohibition) vineyards that had been kept in production as a source of fruit
for home winemakers. One of the first wineries to realize the value of these old Amador
vineyards was Sutter Home, in Napa Valley. In 1971, the winery released its first Amador
County zinfandel, a stunning wine made from grapes from the now highly regarded
Deaver Ranch, in the Shenandoah Valley.

      El Dorado County took its name from a mythical being—El Dorado, the
      golden one. According to legend, Spanish conquistadores searched for El
      Dorado believing he would lead them to a place of gold and riches.

   Most wineries of the Sierra Foothills are not yet well known, and many deserve to be,
given the quality and distinct personality of the best wines. This is changing quickly,
however. Domaine de la Terre Rouge, Montevina, Skinner, and Boeger, for example, have
already developed followings nationally, and there are a half dozen more wineries poised
to join them.
   A remarkable number of grape varieties (more than thirty) are planted in the Sierra
Foothills, but the best wines are almost invariably from red Mediterranean varieties. In
particular, the zinfandels, barberas, syrahs, mourvèdres, and Rhône blends have a robust
boldness that can be irresistible.
                   THE NORTH CENTRAL COAST:
    SANTA CRUZ MOUNTAINS, MONTEREY, CHALONE, MOUNT HARLAN,
             CARMEL VALLEY, & SANTA LUCIA HIGHLANDS

Monterey County and those American Viticultural Areas north of it, up to San Francisco
Bay, are often collectively referred to as the North Central Coast. The area includes the
important wine regions of Santa Cruz Mountains, Chalone, Mount Harlan, Carmel Valley,
Santa Lucia Highlands, and, of course, Monterey. These AVAs range in size from quite
large (Monterey has about 40,000 acres/16,187 hectares of grapevines) to diminutive
(Chalone has 300 acres/120 hectares of grapevines), and each has a distinct personality.

SANTA CRUZ MOUNTAINS
South of San Francisco, about an hour and a half’s drive along California’s iconic
Highway 101, is the funky university town of Santa Cruz, a coastal haven for aging
hippies and ardent surfers. Although it’s right next door to Silicon Valley, Santa Cruz is,
experientially speaking, about as far away as you can get. Here, the mountain air has a
thrillingly sharp, close-to-the-ocean freshness to it. Ancient redwood forests soar up into a
cerulean sky. The mountains themselves have been torn and thrust into beautifully rugged
formations by the perilous San Andreas Fault, which lies below them.
   Thanks to the tangle of mountain crevices, canyons, hilltops, craggy slopes, knolls, and
valleys, plus varying altitudes and orientations to the sun, the vineyards of the Santa Cruz
Mountains can have widely different mesoclimates. In general, the higher vineyards (some
are more than 2,000 feet/600 meters in elevation) and those facing the Pacific Ocean are
considerably cooler than lower vineyards and those facing east, toward the warmer interior
valleys.
   The individuality of the vineyards explains why the region is known, seeming
paradoxically, not only for cool-climate varieties like pinot noir and chardonnay but also
for those that like more warmth, including zinfandel and cabernet sauvignon. What all
vines here do share is the beneficial struggle of growing in the region’s thin, stony
mountain soil.
For more than forty-five years, winemaker Paul Draper has made one of California’s most prestigious and age-worthy
              cabernet sauvignon–based wines—Ridge Monte Bello—from the Santa Cruz Mountains.

   Because vineyards here are neither easy to farm nor high-yielding, most of the district’s
seventy wineries are small-production companies making personality-driven wines.
Heading the list are three wineries with stellar reputations—Ridge Vineyards, Mount Eden
Vineyards, and David Bruce Winery.
   Indeed, Ridge would be on most wine collectors’ A-lists—especially after the winery
came in first in the thirty-year retrospective of the famous Judgment of Paris Tasting of
1976 (see page 671). Year in and year out, Ridge’s wines are exemplary, and their cabernet
sauvignons are nothing short of majestic. They possess the utterly fascinating ability to be
refined yet powerful in the same split second. No wine illustrates the idea better than the
hauntingly rich, explosive Ridge cabernet sauvignon from the Monte Bello vineyard, first
planted in the Santa Cruz Mountains in 1855 and purchased by Ridge in 1959.
                                       BORN TO RHÔNE
 I first met Bonny Doon’s owner, Randall Grahm, a ponytailed, MIT-educated intellectual, in the mid-
 eighties, a couple of years after he founded his vinous “dooniverse” in Santa Cruz. Even in the early
 days, Bonny Doon was full of idiosyncratic wines and zany ways of showcasing them. What other winery
 has owned two large spaceships? (Bonny Doon’s current flying machine is suspended from the ceiling of
 the tasting room.)
     Grahm’s love of wine took hold in Los Angeles in the 1970s, while he worked as a wine shop sales
 clerk (mostly sweeping floors). With financial backing from his family, he eventually created Bonny Doon,
 initially conceived as a winery devoted to pinot noir. But within a decade, Grahm had come under the
 spell of Rhône varieties such as syrah, grenache, marsanne, and roussanne. Among his first wines was
 the inaugural vintage (1984) of Le Cigare Volant, a sexy, syrah-based red that catapulted Grahm to fame
 in California winemaking circles. It was an enological foot in the door, and Grahm (thereafter dubbed the
 “Rhone Ranger”) went on to make dozens of successful wines from dozens of varieties that had
 theretofore been largely overlooked by other California winemakers.

   David Bruce Winery has a cult following for its pinot noirs, which are pinots to the
core—unpredictable (sometimes great, sometimes not so), but always full of character.
And the estate chardonnays from Mount Eden Vineyards have almost mythic stature. The
vineyards, on the crest of a mountain, were planted with chardonnay in 1948.
   The super-creative winery known as Bonny Doon Vineyard is also located here, in a
hamlet named Bonny Doon. In the 1980s and 1990s, the erudite (if madcap)
owner/winemaker Randall Grahm was the first wine-maker to produce a string of
successful fine wines from obscure or never-before-tried-in-California grape varieties, and
his impact on the California wine industry was profound.

MONTEREY COUNTY
Descending southeast from the vast arc of Monterey Bay lies Monterey County, the largest
appellation within the northern part of the Central Coast. There are about 40,000 acres
(16,200 hectares) of vines here, plus thousands upon thousands of acres of vegetables in
the fertile garden known as the Salinas Valley. (Indeed, the Salinas Valley, nicknamed the
“lettuce capital of the world,” is also where more than 50 percent of all the United States’
broccoli, strawberries, mushrooms, spinach, artichokes, and chile peppers are grown.)
   Although there were Franciscan missions in Monterey in the eighteenth century, the
area did not really emerge as a wine region until the 1960s and 1970s, when extensive
urban development in Livermore and Santa Clara, plus rising land prices in Sonoma and
Napa, caused many wineries to look elsewhere for suitable vineyard land. Monterey, an
easily accessible, agricultural coastal region, was just waiting to be tapped.
    The southern part of Monterey can be extremely hot, but the northern part of the county
is a chilly tunnel for cold winds that whip in off the whitecapped waters of Monterey Bay
(home to otters, seals, and migrating whales). The severity of the winds can be seen in the
permanently bowed trees, many of which are stripped of growth on their ocean-facing
side. While a little bit of wind is generally good for vines (it cools them and helps guard
against mildew and rot), extreme wind can cause the cells responsible for photosynthesis
to shut down, inhibiting the ripening of the grapes. In a region that’s already cool,
anything that further constrains ripening is no blessing. Thus, the top vintners have had to
be extremely careful in selecting protected vineyard sites. Even then, Monterey’s cabernet
sauvignons often have a green tobacco note to them, the result of borderline ripeness.
   There are just under forty wineries in Monterey, and a considerable number of wineries
located elsewhere buy Monterey grapes. Chardonnay and pinot noir are the dominant
grapes in the county, especially in the cooler northern part, where wines of real character
can be made. Caymus and Morgan are just two of the best producers making lively
Monterey wines.




The irrepressible Gary Pisoni, owner of Pisoni Vineyards in the Santa Lucia Highlands. Pisoni expanded the idea of just
                                 how luscious and rich California pinot noir could be.
SANTA LUCIA HIGHLANDS, CHALONE, MOUNT HARLAN, AND CARMEL
VALLEY
Within Monterey County and its neighbor, San Benito County, are several small AVAs, the
most significant of which are Santa Lucia Highlands, Chalone, Mount Harlan, and Carmel
Valley.
   In the past decade, Santa Lucia Highlands has come on as a stellar place for pinot noir
—and not just any pinot noir, but rich, bold, flashy, scrumptious pinot. (Some Burgundy-
loving arch-traditionalists say Santa Lucia Highlands’ pinot noirs are, in fact, too rich and
dense.) The nearly 6,000 acres (2,400 hectares) of vineyards here undulate along a single
impressive southeastern-facing bank of the Santa Lucia mountain range. As you drive
south through the Salinas Valley, the vineyards are easy to see, folded up into crevices
1,000 to 2,000 feet (300 to 600 meters) above the valley below, and gently exposed to cold
fog that sweeps down from Monterey Bay morning and night. For all of its proximity to
the sea, this is a very dry place (often no more than 15 inches/38 centimeters of rainfall a
year) and the well-drained, sandy loam and decomposed granite soils have been carried
down canyons in the hillsides on alluvial fans for centuries.
   The name to know here is Gary—there are two of them, local childhood friends who
reportedly shared tractors as toddlers. Gary Pisoni is the owner of Pisoni Vineyards and in
many ways the ambassador of the Highlands. (In a family debate, to convince his farmer
father to expand beyond growing vegetables and plant a vineyard, Pisoni challenged,
“Have you ever been to a $250 lettuce tasting?” His father relented.) Pisoni’s original 5
acres (2 hectares) of pinot noir vines, planted in 1982, are rumored to be “Samsonite
cuttings” (that is, brought to the U.S. surreptiously in a suitcase) from a “famous domaine
in Vosne-Romanée, Burgundy.” Gary Franscioni (the other Gary) owns vineyards with
Pisoni (Rosella’s Vineyard, and one called simply Gary’s), as well as a winery known as
ROAR, which makes phenomenally complex, riveting pinot noirs that sell out
instantaneously. Besides Pisoni Vineyards and ROAR, there are dozens of small producers
making fantastic pinot noirs here, as well as wineries located elsewhere that make pinot
noir from Santa Lucia Highlands grapes.
  In addition to pinot noir, Santa Lucia Highlands is known for chardonnay as well as
impressive syrah. Many top wineries in other parts of California buy grapes from Santa
Lucia Highlands, including Kosta Browne, Siduri, Peter Michael, Belle Glos, Capiaux,
Copain, and others.
   Chalone and Mount Harlan are two very tiny AVAs; indeed, Mount Harlan has but one
winery: Calera. The Chalone appellation (the name comes from the Native Americans
who lived there) is home to Chalone Vineyard. Both Chalone Vineyard and the Calera
Wine Company were founded by individuals maniacally possessed by the conviction that
chalky limestone (a major component in the best soils of Burgundy) was essential for
world-class pinot noir and chardonnay.
   In the case of Chalone Vineyard, that individual was Curtis Tamm, a Burgundian who,
in 1919, found limestone in the Gavilan mountain range and planted a vineyard. This first
Chalone Vineyard is the oldest still producing in Monterey County. Chalone today is
owned by the drinks giant Diageo.
   In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Yale- and Oxford-educated Josh Jensen also went
looking for limestone in California. He, too, found it in the Gavilan mountain range
where, on Mount Harlan, he established the Calera Wine Company in 1975. Calera’s six
pinot noirs, named after people who have been important to Jensen—Jensen (his father),
Mills, Reed, Selleck, Ryan, and deVilliers—are handcrafted from single vineyards and
made in what can only be described as a purist’s manner. Like most of the best pinots, they
are variable and capricious: Sometimes they’re stunning, sometimes not quite so.
    Carmel Valley is named for the postcard-quaint tourist town of Carmel nearby, and the
Carmel River watershed. There are only a handful of wineries spread over this
mountainous area, including, notably, Bernardus and Heller Estate. Most of the better
vineyards sit on warm, east-facing benches and ridges. Unlike the rest of Monterey, which
is known for white wine, this is prime cabernet sauvignon and merlot territory.

          WHEN YOU VISIT… THE NORTH CENTRAL COAST
         THE WINERIES of the North Central Coast are spread out over a large and diverse
         area. Several of the most beautiful are tucked into remote enclaves in the coastal
         mountains. They are not on a tourist route, so calling ahead for an appointment is a
         must.
         IF MONEY IS NO OBJECT, don’t miss an overnight stay, or at least dinner, at either the
         Highlands Inn, on Highland Drive in Carmel, or the Ventana Inn, on Highway 1 in Big
         Sur. Two of the most spectacular, secluded hotels on California’s coast, each has
         stunning views of the Pacific Ocean.
            The North Central Coast Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                                     CALERA

                                            VIOGNIER | MT. HARLAN
                                                   100% viognier
Viognier is a tough-go in California. Too often the wine tastes like spongy orange Halloween candy. But since
1975, Calera has made one of the few excellent viogniers in the state. Long, distinctive, and elegant, its beautiful
aromas are pure and floral—not cosmetic-y. There’s also a lovely sense of tangerine juice and pith. But what’s
especially distinctive are the edgy, tactile hints of white pepper and minerality that give the wine dynamism. Calera,
one of the blue chips of the North Central Coast, also has an illustrious track record with pinot noir.
                                                  DAVID BRUCE

                                 CHARDONNAY | SANTA CRUZ MOUNTAINS
                                                 100% chardonnay
High in the Santa Cruz Mountains, David Bruce makes Meursault-like chardonnays. With their deep golden, nutty,
luscious flavors, they are reminiscent of those Turkish pastries where layers of phyllo are drizzled with honey and
walnuts. And as with good white Burgundy, the opulence and creaminess is beautifully balanced—in this case by a
fresh line of crisp, appley flavor and little sparks of spice. David Bruce winery was founded in the early 1960s by
David Bruce, a young doctor who had just completed his residency. Bruce purchased 40 acres (16 hectares) of
remote land in the Santa Cruz Mountains and cleared it, by hand, himself. Bruce’s chardonnay was one of the
original eleven California wines to be included in the famous Judgment of Paris Tasting of 1976 (see page 671).
The winery is also known for its stellar pinot noirs.

                                                      REDS




                                                       ROAR

                                   PINOT NOIR | SANTA LUCIA HIGHLANDS
                                                  100% pinot noir
Saying ROAR to a pinot noir lover is a little like saying “Ferrari” to a person who loves cars. Some of the most
luscious, complex, and rich pinots in the state are made by this small producer. Besides the regular (delicious) Santa
Lucia bottling, there are two other, especially highly sought-after ROARs—Gary’s Vineyard and, a fraction more
expensive, Pisoni Vineyard. Both are phenomenal wines. Gary’s Vineyard lifts off the palate like a rocket launcher
and is infused with attractive peat and cranberry flavors (a great pinot for Scotch lovers). The Pisoni Vineyard pinot
noir is dense, long, and almost muscular for pinot noir. But its tiny explosions of spice keep it fascinating and alive
on the palate. ROAR gets its name from the sound of the Monterey Bay winds roaring through the winery’s
vineyards.
                                                   CALERA
                                      PINOT NOIR | MILLS | MT. HARLAN
                                                  100% pinot noir
Calera makes six single-vineyard pinot noirs from vineyards on limestone soil in the heart of the Gavilan
Mountains. Each year they are some of the most ethereal, delicate, refined pinots in California. Picking a favorite is
next to impossible, for what they all possess is the seamless beauty of elegant fruit that drives pinot noir lovers
mad. Calera’s pinots are not superfruity, and they don’t jump out of the glass with richness. Indeed, in a blind
tasting, most professionals confuse them with subtle Burgundies for their contemplative character.




                                   BONNY DOON VINEYARD
                            LE CIGARE VOLANT | RESERVE | CENTRAL COAST
                  Approximately 30% syrah, 30% grenache, 20% mourvèdre, 20% cinsaut
Randall Grahm’s first (1984) and leading Rhône wine, Le Cigare Volant, is modeled after the wines of
Châteauneuf-du-Pape and takes its name from a real law on that city’s books prohibiting flying saucers—or “flying
cigars,” as they’re called in France—from landing in the region’s vineyards. Dark and savory, Le Cigare Volant is
not a massive wine nor even a wine that’s “Californian” in style. Rather, it’s an homage to the delicious Rhône
gestalt of flavors—wild herbs, roasted game, leather, salt, white pepper, and a wonderful gush of cherry preserves
smack in the center. There is a “regular” Le Cigare Volant, but the Reserve—aged in large glass jars known as
carboys in English and called, more beautifully, bonbonnes in French—is more compelling, more vivid, and the
wine you want.
                                                    RIDGE
                                 MONTE BELLO | SANTA CRUZ MOUNTAINS
            Approximately 70% cabernet sauvignon, with the remainder merlot and petit verdot
As structured, powerful, and impeccably balanced as a First Growth Bordeaux, the Ridge Monte Bello cabernet
sauvignons are majestic wines. Opening one from a great vintage when it’s young is almost criminal, for while the
inky, dense, young version will knock you out with its flavor impact, older ones are mesmerizing. With a decade or
more of age, Monte Bello unfurls into a hauntingly complex wine that is quite simply one of the greatest cabernets
in the United States. For anyone who has tasted an older Monte Bello, it will come as no surprise that this was the
wine that placed first in the thirty-year reenactment of the Judgment of Paris Tasting. Ridge was founded in 1959 by
four Stanford Research Institute engineers, who still own it; the winery’s famous wine-maker, Paul Draper, is still at
the helm after forty years.
                           LIVERMORE VALLEY

East and slightly south of San Francisco is one of California’s most historically influential
wine regions, the small, 15-mile-long-(24-kilometer) Livermore Valley. Some of the
state’s most important wineries were begun here over a century ago, including Wente,
Concannon, and Cresta Blanca (now gone). Atypically for valleys in California, the
Livermore Valley runs east-west. Although it can be brightly sunny and as hot as blazes
during the day, the valley becomes an enormous wind tunnel by late afternoon.
Temperatures can drop by a full 50°F (28°C) at night. The combination of bright light,
heat, and strong winds, followed by nighttime cooling, plus the valley’s shallow soil, is
reminiscent of parts of southern France.
   Among the top wineries here, Wente, in particular, has made remarkable contributions
not solely to Livermore Valley but to the California wine industry as a whole—especially
concerning chardonnay. Most of the chardonnay grapes grown in the state today, for
example, are Wente clones or derived from Wente clones, including California’s most
planted chardonnay clone, known as clone 4 (technically, Foundation Plant Sciences
Clone 04). The Wente clones, as well as other clones derived from these, were the result of
painstaking genetic research that Ernest Wente conducted over his lifetime. Son of the
winery’s founder, Carl H. Wente, Ernest began experimenting with chardonnay in 1912,
when the grape was all but unheard of in California and only a minuscule amount was
planted, most of it in Livermore. Ernest imported his chardonnay from the nursery at the
University of Montepellier, France, still considered one of the leading viticultural schools
in France. Today Wente continues to make wonderful chardonnays in a variety of styles,
from full and buttery to a fresh, unoaked style.

      Most of the sauvignon blanc in California came from cuttings brought initially
      to Livermore Valley from Bordeaux’s famous Château d’Yquem.
 The current generations of Wentes: Phillip, Carolyn, Karl, Christine, and Eric. The Wente family brought some of the
                                first chardonnay to California from France in 1912.

   Livermore’s other leading historic winery is Concannon, built in 1883 (the same year as
Wente) by Irish immigrant and devout Catholic James Concannon. During his lifetime,
Joseph, James Concannon’s son, sent a barrel of the Concannon muscat de Frontignan to
the pope every five years. Joseph’s brother Jim was the first to introduce a varietal petite
sirah in California, in 1961. Concannon is now owned by The Wine Group, the third
largest wine company in the U.S. and makers of Franzia wine-in-a-box.
   The Wentes and Concannons were helped significantly by the ambitions of another
prominent Livermore figure, newspaper journalist turned winemaker Charles Wetmore.
Just before founding Cresta Blanca in 1882, Wetmore persuaded the California legislature
to establish the state viticultural commission. As the commission’s first president and
CEO, Wetmore headed straight for Europe, where he obtained cuttings from prestigious
sources, including cuttings of sauvignon blanc and sémillon from no less than Bordeaux’s
Château d’Yquem. Those cuttings became the plant material for vineyards in Livermore,
which, in turn, provided it to other vineyards all over the state. Thus, the leading clone of
sauvignon blanc now grown in California (called clone 1) is Wetmore’s acquisition from
Château d’Yquem.
    Early on, Livermore Valley thrived not only because of the dynamism of its first
vintners and its suitability for viticulture, but also because of its close proximity to San
Francisco. Sadly, the latter would also prove—almost—to be the valley’s undoing.
Housing divisions, industrial parks, and an endless stream of urban development
throughout the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s gobbled up Livermore’s vineyards with
frightening finality. By the late 1980s, thousands of acres of grapes had simply
disappeared. The valley has initiated an innovative land-use comeback, and there are now
some fifty wineries in the region.
   Among the top Livermore wineries are Wente and Concannon, along with Steven Kent,
McGrail, Kalin, Fenestra, Page Mill, and Darcie Kent.
             PASO ROBLES AND YORK MOUNTAIN

About halfway between San Francisco and Los Angeles (but light-years away from the
cosmopolitan way of life) is Paso Robles, with its rustic, country western feel. (If you’ve
never seen a horse drinking beer in a bar—surely a seminal experience for anyone who
appreciates beverages—you’ll want to mark your calendar for the annual Pioneer Day
celebration at the Pine Street Saloon in October.) Here, along California’s quiet mid-
Central Coast, are 26,000 acres (10,500 hectares) of Paso Robles vineyards and more than
230 wineries.
                                       TABLAS CREEK
 Tablas Creek Vineyard was established in 1989, when the Perrin family of Château de Beaucastel, in
 Châteauneuf-du-Pape, France, and Robert Hass, famed U.S. importer and founder of Vineyard Brands,
 purchased 120 acres (50 hectares) in Paso Robles after a four-year search throughout California for the
 optimal site to grow Rhône varieties. In 1990, the partners began the lengthy process of importing vines
 from the Château de Beaucastel estate, including several clones of mourvèdre, grenache noir, syrah,
 counoise, roussanne, viognier, marsanne, grenache blanc, and picpoul blanc. After a three-year, USDA-
 mandated indexing process to ensure the vines were virus-free, the vines were ready to be multiplied
 (eventually reaching some 200,000 annually) and planted at Tablas Creek, both for the winery’s own use
 and to be sold to others. California producers who have planted Tablas Creek clonal material include
 Ridge, Bonny Doon, Qupé, Zaca Mesa, and Stolpman, among many others.

    The AVA is the most dramatic exception to the generally cool climates of the middle
and southern Central Coast. A generally very warm expanse of sun-baked, oak-studded
hills (the original name, El Paso de Robles, means “the pass of oaks” in Spanish), Paso
Robles is shielded from the cool, maritime influence of the Pacific Ocean by the almost
solid curtain of the Santa Lucia Range on the AVA’s western side. That said, producers
here are quick to point out whether their vineyards are on the slightly cooler and hillier
western side of Paso Robles, closest to the ocean (the “west side”—considered the better
part of the region), or the flatter, hotter eastern part.
                     EDNA VALLEY AND ARROYO GRANDE
 At 35 square miles and 67 square miles (91 square kilometers and 174 square kilometers), respectively,
 Edna Valley and Arroyo Grande may be small viticultural areas, but they are pinot noir and chardonnay
 edens. Located about 40 miles (64 kilometers) south of Paso Robles, both areas are close to the sea
 and profoundly influenced by its cool, damp breezes. These coastal effects temper Edna Valley’s climate
 enough to create one of the longest growing seasons of any wine region in California. Arroyo Grande is
 even cooler, being blanketed in fog for most of the day (which begins to explain why pinot noir thrives
 here).
    Edna Valley was one of the first areas where Spanish missionaries planted the mission grape, but the
 region lay neglected for centuries until the Goss family planted vineyards in 1973, and started Chamisal
 Vineyards. Arroyo Grande was similarly brought out of obscurity in the second half of the twentieth
 century, thanks to Maison Deutz, the California subsidiary of the Champagne house Deutz, which
 purchased land in Arroyo Grande in 1982, but sadly no longer makes wine there.
    Today, the most well-known pinot noirs (and they are sensational) are from Chamisal and Laetitia, and
 the best chardonnays are made by Edna Valley Vineyards and Talley Vineyards. In addition, using
 grapes from Edna Valley, tiny Alban Vineyards makes one of the most sensual viogniers in California.

   The significant variation between hot daytime and nighttime temperatures, often as
great as 50°F (28°C), saves the best wines from being simply overripe and overwrought.
In addition, many of the top wines are the result of vines planted in calcareous clays
(limestones), which, in particular, can be found on the west side of Paso Robles, closer
toward the ocean.
   For years, the top wineries of Paso Robles felt that the region needed to be divided into
smaller AVAs that would reflect the overall region’s diversity. In 2014, that’s exactly what
happened. The Bureau of Tax and Trade approved the largest appellation proposal in U.S.
history and established eleven new appellations within Paso Robles: Adelaida District,
Creston District, El Pomar District, Paso Robles Estrella District, Paso Robles Geneseo
District, Paso Robles Highlands District, Paso Robles Willow Creek District, San Juan
Creek, San Miguel District, Santa Margarita Ranch, and the Templeton Gap District. It
will undoubtedly be many years before the distinctive characteristics of the wines from
these AVAs are known.
                   The rocky, limestone-laced vineyards of Tablas Creek in Paso Robles.

   As for grapes, the most widely planted varieties in Paso Robles are cabernet sauvignon,
merlot, syrah, zinfandel, and chardonnay (in that order). Indeed, some of the syrah planted
in California is thought to be descended from syrah vines planted by Paso Robles’s Eberle
Winery in 1975. Later, in the late 1990s, the nursery at Tablas Creek was the source of
200,000 cuttings a year of Rhône varieties, much of which was syrah.
   Although the Central Coast has a reputation for expansive vineyards yielding high
volumes of grapes, nearly two-thirds of wineries in Paso Robles produce fewer than five
thousand cases annually. Additionally, 95 percent of wineries are family owned and
operated.
A winter sunset in the dry-farmed, wide-spaced, head-pruned zinfandel vineyards of Dusi Vineyard. The Dusi family has
                               been farming zinfandel grapes in Paso Robles since 1924.

   Among the top wineries of Paso Robles are Saxum, Turley, L’Aventure, and Daou
Vineyards. Additionally, Ridge Vineyards (located in the Santa Cruz Mountains) makes
one of its twelve exquisite zinfandels from Paso Robles grapes; and Andrew Murray
Vineyards (located in the Santa Ynez Valley) makes devastatingly good grenache from
Paso.




   Just west of Paso Robles, on the eastern side of the Santa Lucia Range, the York
Mountain AVA—the smallest in the mid-Central Coast—sits more than 1,500 feet (460
meters) high in the mountains, near a deep gash in the range known as the Templeton Gap.
This cool-climate viticultural area is only 7 miles (11 kilometers) from the Pacific Ocean.
Although today there are only 50 acres (20 hectares) of vineyards, the first winery on the
Central Coast was established here. Originally known as Ascension Winery and later as
York Mountain Winery, it was built by trailblazer Andrew Jackson York in the late
nineteenth century using bricks that were hand-formed and fired onsite. Alas, the building
was devastated by the 2003 Paso Robles earthquake, but it is being rebuilt by its new
owner, Epoch Winery.
                                          BIEN NACIDO
In the early 1980s, when I went to Santa Barbara wine country for the first time (amazingly enough, on
assignment for Playboy magazine), Bien Nacido was already famous. At the time, it was highly unusual
for an American vineyard to be well known, especially one in the Santa Maria Valley of Santa Barbara
County (itself not well known then). But the name Bien Nacido, which means “well born,” said it all.
Indeed, it seemed like a majority of the greatest wines coming out of Santa Barbara County all had the
words Bien Nacido Vineyards on their labels. The sloped vineyard, with panoramic views facing
southwest, had been planted in 1973 by a multigenerational farming family named Miller. It was a huge
vineyard—600 acres (240 hectares) of mostly chardonnay, pinot noir, and syrah—divided into small
blocks that were named alphabetically. Winemakers, then and now, contracted for the fruit by specific
rows of grapes. In 2007, after nearly thirty-five years of custom farming, the family decided to make their
own wines as well. Bien Nacido pinot noir from Bien Nacido Vineyards (eight rows from Q block) is
classically bien nacido: elegant and sumptuous.
                   THE SOUTH CENTRAL COAST:
  SANTA BARBARA COUNTY, SANTA MARIA VALLEY, SANTA YNEZ VALLEY,
       STA. RITA HILLS, BALLARD CANYON, AND HAPPY CANYON

About an hour and a half’s drive north of Los Angeles, the American Viticultural Area
Santa Barbara County contains two large AVAs within it: Santa Maria Valley and Santa
Ynez Valley. Telescoping down further within the Santa Ynez Valley, there are three
smaller AVAs: Sta. Rita Hills, Ballard Canyon, and Happy Canyon. Collectively, these are
called the South Central Coast, and they are among the most dynamic wine regions in the
state. The sheer concentration of supertalented, independently minded winemakers here is
astounding, from the wise old guard (men like Richard Sanford, Jim Clendenen, and Bob
Lindquist) to younger winemakers crafting some of the most delicious, enticing wines in
the state (Greg Brewer, Jenne Lee Bonaccorsi, Paul Lato, Steve Clifton, Gavin Chanin,
Matt Murphy, Adam Lee, Sashi Moorman, and dozens of others).
   Unlike the North Central Coast, where the viticultural areas are distinctly different, the
South Central Coast’s AVAs share an overriding style and character. As a result, I’ll talk
about them jointly, while noting some climatic differences.
    In a state that is never at a loss for beauty, the Santa Ynez and Santa Maria valleys may
be the most alluring wine regions. In the spring and fall, the sunlight has an unreal clarity
to it, as if the light itself were looking at you. The hills are curved in feminine roundness.
Immense mesas spread out magnificently, then stop and fall into the scarred arroyos that
split them. Ancient oaks, with their tangled arms, seem twisted in their own embrace.
Everywhere, cattle and horses graze. Fields of strawberries go on forever. Within an hour,
you’re so mellow that drinking really good pinot noir strikes you as a constitutional right,
not to mention a necessary part of your life’s work.
   Paradoxically, the South Central Coast is one of the oldest wine regions in California—
and, at the same time, among the hippest and newest. Spanish missions and vineyards
were strung like beads on a necklace here in the eighteenth century. As of the early 1980s,
the South Central Coast had become a haven for tiny, imaginative wine companies on
shoestring budgets, headed by maverick winemakers who intuitively understood the
region’s potential (wineries like Sanford, Au Bon Climat, Qupé, Foxen, and Zaca Mesa,
for example). By the late 1980s, however, so many delicious wines were coming out of the
region that big companies like Robert Mondavi, Beringer, and Kendall-Jackson moved in
and snapped up huge tracts of vineyard land at comparatively rock-bottom prices. It
seemed like the indie character of the South Central Coast would be lost in a sea of
corporate winemaking.
                                     THE WINE GHETTO
 In distance, Santa Barbara County may be the closest wine region to Hollywood. But in style, you
 couldn’t get farther away than the decidedly reverse-chic “wine ghetto.” Located in the town of Lompoc,
 in the Sobhani Industrial Park, the ghetto is a confab of small, hip tasting rooms and wine production
 facilities. The first winemaker to set up shop here was Rick Longoria, who did so in 1998. Longoria didn’t
 have the money to build an impressive winery (or any winery at all, for that matter), and he figured the
 industrial park’s proximity to his vineyards would be advantageous. Today, the blue and white industrial
 buildings house more than twenty brands, including Evening Land, Samsara, Fiddlehead, Stolpman, and,
 of course, Longoria. The laid-back atmosphere, exuberant camaraderie, world-class wines, and ethno
 food trucks all add up to what has become, against the odds, a not-to-be-missed wine destination.

   But that has not happened. If anything, these valleys continue to be a hotbed of young
energy, originality, and a fervor to make great wine. Indeed, and not so surprisingly, some
of the newest, tiny wine companies have been started not by trained winemakers but by
sommeliers who taught themselves winemaking and for whom the South Central Coast is
the place to be.
   Despite a southerly latitude, parts of the South Central Coast are by far among the
coolest wine areas in the state. The reason: the direction in which the main valleys lie.
During California’s tumultuous geologic past, most of the state’s mountain ranges were
formed in a north/south direction, tearing open valleys that also ran essentially north to
south (think of Napa and Sonoma as well as the huge Central Valley, for example).
Unusually for California, however, the wine areas of Santa Ynez and Santa Maria were
formed so that the valleys run basically east to west, enabling them to become direct
conduits for fog and cold offshore winds that barrel inland from the Pacific Ocean, making
summertime temperatures hover around the low 70s (around 21°C). The soils here have
also been influenced by the Pacific Ocean. Most are sedimentary soils left from ancient
seabeds, now often covered by many feet of wind-blown sand. Indeed, in the far western
parts of the valleys—in an area such as Sta. Rita Hills, for example—the soils are often
fossilized, diatom-rich sand dunes that have been weathered by centuries of age.
         Jim Clendenen, one of the pioneers and most influential winemakers of the South Central Coast.

      Within an hour of being in the South Central Coast, you’re so mellow that
      drinking really good pinot noir strikes you as a constitutional right, not to
      mention a necessary part of your life’s work.

   Of the two main regions, Santa Maria is the most northern and Santa Ynez is just
southeast of Santa Maria. Within Santa Ynez, from west (coldest climate) to east (warmest
climate) are: Sta. Rita Hills, Ballard Canyon, and Happy Canyon.
   Sitting at the far western end, the small cluster of hills known as the Sta. Rita Hills was
considered far too cold for grape growing until 1970, when maverick vintners Richard
Sanford and his partner Michael Benedict decided to take the risk and plant pinot noir
there. The vineyard they established—known as Sanford & Benedict—went on to become
one of the most legendary vineyards in California, and proof that the Sta. Rita Hills, one of
the coldest parts of the South Central Coast, was capable of producing pinot noirs with an
elegance that rivaled Burgundy. Today, some fifty wineries are located in Sta. Rita Hills or
make wine (primarily pinot noir and chardonnay) from vineyards here.
   As you travel east, inland and farther from the ocean, you come to Ballard Canyon and
eventually Happy Canyon. Both are known for some devastatingly good syrahs, more on
which in a moment. Plus, in Happy Canyon, good cabernet sauvignons are now being
made, along with wonderful sauvignon blancs (try the delicious sauvignons from Grassini
Vineyards and from Margerum, especially the one called Sibarite). Finally, a piece of
history that cannot go unmentioned: The evocatively titled Happy Canyon got its name
because it was once a moonshine-making site for local dude ranches. It’s also where
Hollywood directors filmed feel-good westerns like The Lone Ranger. (And yes, the
stallion Silver—as in “hi-ho Silver!”—lived here.)
   As for grapes and the wines made from them, chardonnay makes up about 40 percent
of the grapes grown in the Santa Maria Valley and Santa Ynez Valley. To me, the wines
made from them are some of the most distinct, precise, and complex chardonnays in the
state. Chardonnays like those from Diatom, Lafond, Sandhi, Au Bon Climat and its sister
winery, Clendenen Family Vineyards, Melville Estate, and Paul Lato, for example, have
pristine flavors thanks to their through-line of vibrating acidity. Yet, they are lushly
textured at the same time. In this regard, they are like Burgundian Premier Crus. There’s
also a fantastic sense of exotic fruit about them (quince, bergamot, kaffir lime) plus a very
apparent minerality or salinity—what longtime wine-maker Rick Longoria calls a “chalky,
rocky, salty” character, perhaps from the region’s sandy seabed soils replete with marine
fossils.




 Many of California’s top wine regions surround Catholic missions founded in the 1700s. From San Diego and Santa
 Barbara in the south to Sonoma in the north, the missions were strung out like pearls on a necklace, each a one-day
                                            horseback ride from the next.

   As for pinot noir, the South Central Coast makes, as I’ve said, some of the most elegant
pinots in the state. They are absolutely driven by vividly bright fruit and spice flavors—a
pinot lover looking just for earthiness won’t find much in these wines. (I think of them as
tasting like tiny wild woodland strawberries in the forest, not the forest itself.) And
although they do not taste tart, South Central Coast pinot noirs have a structure that comes
from cool fruit with lots of acid. As a result, the wines have a precise, silky, tight-knit
character, almost as if the fruit is spring-loaded. Then, once you sip, all that fruit explodes
into aromas and flavors. Many of these pinots benefit from very early bud-break, then a
very long, gentle growing season (considered one of the core requirements for complexity
in wine). Moreover, the absence of heat spikes means the grapes retain their lovely
aromatics and crisp acidity, giving them bright flavors. Says winemaker Greg Brewer,
“Ripening in California is like a big and rapid heartbeat; except down here. Here, the
heartbeat is slow and long.”
  Finally, a word about syrah. The South Central Coast may well be syrah’s ultimate
California home—that singular place where it consistently makes uncommonly good
wine. For now, and for sure, this is true: Syrah here is huge, meaty, thick, and wild. The
vivid, almost blueberry syrup-like character is slashed with spiciness and something like
wild lavender. They are syrahs evocative of blood and strength. Indeed, one of the top
syrah producers here is Sanguis—the Latin word for “blood” or “strength.” Also fantastic
and worth seeking out: Jonata, Refugio Ranch, The Ojai Vineyard, Stolpman, Margerum,
Andrew Murray, Qupé, Sans Liege, and Zotovich.

          WHEN YOU VISIT… THE SOUTH CENTRAL COAST
         SANTAS YNEZ, MARIA, AND RITA are among the most charming, laid-back-but-
         sophisticated wine regions in the state, and hospitality here runs deep. Since the
         countryside itself is drop-dead beautiful, wandering around the countryside among
         wineries is a simply fantastic experience. Or, wander around in town. Santa Barbara
         County has a number of small towns virtually devoted to tasting. In Los Olivos, for
         example, the thirty plus tasting rooms can keep you busy for hours.
         THE RESTAURANT not to be missed in this part of wine country is The Hitching Post II
         in Buellton, a no-frills local hangout (made famous in the movie Sideways and usually
         full of winemakers) where the specialty is grilled red meats.
            The South Central Coast Wines to Know
                                                  WHITES




                                                     DIATOM

                                   CHARDONNAY | MIYA | STA. RITA HILLS
                                                100% chardonnay
After I tasted this wine for the first time (in 2012; it was the 2010 vintage), my view of California chardonnay
changed forever. Frankly, I didn’t think California’s chardonnays would ever broach this level of exquisiteness. But
Diatom’s Miya (the name means “Beautiful Night”) is as pristine and exact and pent up as a wave about to break in
the early morning sea. Avant-garde winemaker Greg Brewer says he is motivated by “a Japanese aesthetic,”
“negative space,” “the movement of the restricted voice,” and a “dread for the explicit.” This is not conventional
winespeak, to be sure. But few words are needed anyway. The wine, in this case, actually does say it all.
                                               MELVILLE
                                  CHARDONNAY | INOX | STA. RITA HILLS
                                               100% chardonnay
Over the past decade, Melville has quietly become one of the most exciting wineries on the South Central Coast.
Indeed, the winery makes such soulful, sensual pinot noirs, it’s almost a crime to write about anything else. But
Melville’s Inox (the name means “stainless-steel” in French) is an amazingly lush chardonnay—every molecule of
which is based simply on the purity of the fruit (the wine is not exposed to oak barrels). Of course, dozens of
chardonnays in California are now made in the “unoaked” style—but none of them comes close to the complexity
and excellence of this one.
                                          AU BON CLIMAT
                   CHARDONNAY | BIEN NACIDO VINEYARD | SANTA MARIA VALLEY
                                                100% chardonnay
When he began his winery in 1982, Jim Clendenen, the owner and winemaker of Au Bon Climat, was an irreverent,
irascible nonconformist with fierce opinions and colossal talent. Now, all these years later, he’s exactly the same,
with one added trait—he’s inspired and mentored more young winemakers than perhaps any other winemaker in
southern California. As such, his artistic impact on the region and its wines has been profound. As a young man,
Clendenen immersed himself in the artisanal wine-making of Burgundy. Today, his wines still evoke that early love
affair with Burgundian chardonnay and pinot noir. This chardonnay from the famed Bien Nacido Vineyard, for
example, is as voluptuous, creamy, nutty, lees-y, and earthy as can be, and yet it’s vibrant, precise, complex, and
imbued with a pulsing force of acidity (hello, Bâtard-Montrachet). And for bigger-is-always-better drinkers, this
wine’s sister, Au Bon Climat’s Nuits-Blanches au Bouge, steps it up just a notch. I asked Jim what Nuits-Blanches
au Bouge meant, and here was his answer: “A nuits-blanches (white night) is a night without sleeping in French
slang. A bouge, in the French dictionary, is a pig warren or den, or in slang, a brothel. So a Nuits-Blanches au
Bouge is a sleepless passage in a decadent environment. Oenologically speaking, it is a multiple-entendres of
nuanced but daunting complexity.”

                                                     REDS
                                               BREWER-CLIFTON

                              PINOT NOIR | MOUNT CARMEL | STA. RITA HILLS
                                                  100% pinot noir
Greg Brewer and Steve Clifton are, like many business partners, very different men. But when it comes to
winemaking, both are poets, able to find the deep and the meaningful. Somehow, they always coax out an extra
sense of purity, richness, and rhythm that then defines their wines. This Mount Carmel pinot noir, for example, is a
bottomless pond of kirschlike fruit, framed by echoes of spice, violets, and sea salt, plus a wonderful umami
character reminiscent of the savoriness of beef juices. All these hedonic flavors are carried on slow waves of
sensation, giving the wine an unreal sense of length. The small Mount Carmel vineyard, right in the heart of Sta.
Rita Hills, was first planted in 1992.




                                                    SIDURI
                          PINOT NOIR | CLOS PEPE VINEYARD | STA. RITA HILLS
                                                  100% pinot noir
Siduri is a tiny enterprise, which, in certain years and despite its size, makes an astounding twenty-five different
pinot noirs. I love this one in particular, from the Clos Pepe Vineyard, named for the first vineyard Stephen and
Catherine Pepe ever planted, which was in their backyard. Full of personality and refinement, it is a study in
contrasts. In the same sip, it is silky yet charged with firecrackers of spice. Long swaths of earthiness are
interspersed with flecks of espresso-like bitterness. There’s a coolness here (like menthol) at the same time that the
wine is infused with warm tones (like sun-baked raspberries).
                                                SANFORD
                         PINOT NOIR | SANFORD & BENEDICT | STA. RITA HILLS
                                                 100% pinot noir
Year after year, the freshness, purity, beauty, lift, and sheer exquisiteness of this wine continue to amaze wine
professionals and pinot noir lovers alike, for in many ways, this was the pinot noir that first inspired a whole
generation of southern California wine-makers. Established in 1971 by maverick vintners Richard Sanford and
Michael Benedict, the Sanford & Benedict vineyard was the first vineyard in what today is the Sta. Rita Hills AVA.
Countless advice at the time warned the two men that they were out of their minds, for the region was considered
too close to the Pacific Ocean and therefore too cold to grow grapes. A few years later, Richard Sanford established
his eponymous winery and began making pinot noir with the Sanford & Benedict grapes. Today, Sanford Winery is
owned by the Terlato Wine Company, which continues to carefully make this crown jewel of the South Central
Coast.
                                                   JONATA
                         SYRAH | LA SANGRE DE JONATA | SANTA YNEZ VALLEY
                                             97% syrah, 3% viognier
Jonata is a great example of the bold, distinctive, artisanal syrahs coming out of Santa Ynez. With its flavors
reminiscent of meat juices, charcuterie, and exotic spices, this wine clearly pays homage to Côte-Rôtie. Yet, with all
of the beautiful blueberry and blackberry fruit, it is also definitively Californian. The complexity here is almost a
kind of moodiness, as the wine explores the edges of bitterness, chalk, lavender, and violets. Jonata (pronounced
ho-NA-ta; it’s the Chumash Indian word for “live oak”) comes from grapes grown on a small part of a 600-acre
(240-hectare) ranch in Ballard Canyon. Winemaker Matt Dees has a degree in soil science, but is self-taught as a
winemaker. The owner of Jonata, billionaire sports-team and real estate tycoon Stan Kroenke, also owns Napa
Valley’s Screaming Eagle winery, the NFL’s St. Louis Rams, the NBA’s Denver Nuggets, and the English soccer
club Arsenal.
                                      THE OJAI VINEYARD
                      SYRAH | SOLOMON HILLS VINEYARD | SANTA MARIA VALLEY
                                                    100% syrah
Syrah—unhinged. (I’m not sure how a wine can take on the character of a psychological thriller, but this one has.)
The wild—almost savage—energy of flavors in this wine is mesmerizing: cedar, incense, sage, spice, and a deep,
rich, red meatiness, like an oxtail stew that has simmered for hours. But as primordial as the aromas and flavors are,
it’s the choreography—the way this wine detonates on the palate—that leaves you most impressed. Among wine
industry insiders, Adam Tolmach, the owner/winemaker of the tiny Ojai Vineyard, is considered one of the best
winemakers in California.
WASHINGTON STATE

Most of the world’s classic grapes can grow in lots of places, but each has a kind of
spiritual home—a place (or sometimes places) where that grape can ascend beyond what
is merely good and be transformed into stunning wine. In the 1990s, Washington State,
much to most wine drinkers’ surprise, emerged as one of the great spiritual homes of
cabernet sauvignon and merlot. The phenomenon was startling, for only a dozen or so
years earlier most winemakers’ hopes were pinned on gewürztraminer, chardonnay, and
other white grapes that filled the vineyards. As it turns out, these grapes (which are still
widely grown in Washington) make good wine there. But nothing like the top tier of
cabernets and merlots.
   By the late 1990s, with cabernet and merlot well established, two more grapes captured
the imaginations of Washington wine-growers: riesling and syrah. By the late 2000s,
Washington State made the best riesling in the country, and the state had become known as
a hotbed of fantastic, rich, complex syrahs that were the equal of (and some would argue
better than) syrah grown anywhere else in the United States.
   What you notice immediately about the greatest Washington State cabernet sauvignons
and merlots (or blends of the two) is the concentration of the wines. It almost seems as
though, by some magical osmosis, they’ve been infused with the primal, lush berryness of
wild Northwest blackberries, boysenberries, raspberries, and cherries.

                  THE QUICK SIP ON WASHINGTON STATE
         WASHINGTON STATE is the second-largest wine-producing state in the United States
         (after California), and is known for highly structured, deeply flavored cabernet
         sauvignon, merlot, and syrah, as well as inspired rieslings.
         WASHINGTON STATE is one of the few places in the U.S. (and indeed, in the world)
         where many vines grow on their own roots (not on phylloxera-tolerant rootstocks).
         VIRTUALLY ALL of Washington’s vineyards are in the dry, warm, eastern part of the
         state, separated from the rainy western part by the Cascade Range.
 The high-elevation Cascade Mountains form a rain shield, insuring that the wine regions in eastern Washington State
                                          don’t have Seattle’s weather.

   To the uninitiated, the idea that Washington can produce great wine seems, at first,
nonsensical. After all, the state is best known for its rain—a factor that led to the rise of its
famous coffeehouses (what else to do when it’s pouring?), including Starbucks, which
began here. However, virtually all of the state’s grapes (there are more than thirty
varieties) are grown not in the west, near Seattle, but in the arid, almost desertlike eastern
part of the state. The massive Cascade mountain range, which divides the two areas, is so
effective as a rain shield that eastern and western Washington are about as similar in
appearance as Montana and Vermont.
   There are thirteen AVAs in Washington State, the three most prominent of which are
the gigantic Columbia Valley, and within it, the two smaller but highly thought of
appellations Yakima Valley and Walla Walla Valley. Most of the other AVAs are also
within the Columbia Valley AVA. They include Red Mountain, Horse Heaven Hills,
Wahluke Slope, Rattlesnake Hills, Snipes Mountain, Lake Chelan, Naches Heights, and
Ancient Lakes of Columbia Valley. Indeed there are only two appellations that fall outside
of the Columbia Valley: Columbia Gorge, on the Oregon-Washington border (in 1805, the
gorge was the route used by the Lewis and Clark Expedition to reach the Pacific), and the
smallest appellation in the state and the only one on the western side of the Cascades—
Puget Sound.
   Although the first wine grapes were planted in Washington State by Italian and German
emigrants in the 1860s and 1870s, the modern wine industry was born a hundred years
later. Over the past few decades, the number of wineries in the state has increased rapidly.
In 1960, Washington State had fifteen wineries; in 1995, it had eighty-eight. By 2012,
there were just over 740.
   The forerunners of Washington’s powerful merlots and cabernets were three wines,
pinot noir, grenache, and gewürztraminer, made in 1951 by a psychology professor in his
basement. Humble as those wines must have been, they held a promise. Indeed, a little
more than a decade later, the modern Washington wine industry began to take form. The
professor, Dr. Lloyd Woodburne, was a home winemaker who was soon joined in his
hobby by several of his university colleagues. They named themselves Associated
Vintners and began making wine together. As their skills and production increased, the
hobby turned serious. A commercial winery was built, and in 1967 the first wines—
cabernet sauvignon, gewürztra-miner, pinot noir, and riesling (then known as Johannisberg
riesling)—were produced. In 1984, Associated Vintners became Columbia Winery, one of
the first Washington State wineries devoted to premium wines.

               THE MOST IMPORTANT WASHINGTON STATE
                              WINES
                                            LEADING WINES
         CABERNET FRANC red
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MERLOT red
         PINOT GRIS/PINOT GRIGIO white
         RIESLING white (dry and sweet)
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white
         SYRAH red

                                            WINES OF NOTE
         FRUIT WINES MADE FROM RASPBERRIES, PEARS, AND OTHER FRUIT
         GEWÜRZTRAMINER white
         LEMBERGER red
         MALBEC red
         SÉMILLON white
         SPARKLING WINES white
         VIOGNIER white



                        DON’T CRY FOR ME WALLA WALLA
    Wine and roses? That’s already had its day(s). Wine and cheese? Been there, done that. Wine and
    onions? Okay, you’re listening. Walla Walla Valley—the tiny wine region in southeastern Washington—is
    perhaps the only wine region in the world that is famous for both its delicious red wines and its delicious,
    jumbo-size sweet onions—24 million pounds (11 million kilograms) of which are harvested each year.
    Like the Vidalia from Georgia and the Maui from Hawaii, Walla Walla onions are low in sulfur (the
    compound that makes you cry) and so sweet they can be eaten out of hand, as you would an apple.

   Meanwhile, other wines were being produced in Washington, just as they had been for
decades. Mostly they were cheap, sweet, and fortified. After Prohibition, for example, the
companies Pommerelle and National Wine Company (NAWICO) made millions of
gallons of such stuff from Concord and other native varieties. Pommerelle and NAWICO
are now unknown names, but the company that they eventually became, after they merged,
is the most well-known and largest winery in Washington State: Chateau Ste. Michelle,
founded in 1965 under the name Ste. Michelle Vintners. Chateau Ste. Michelle
immediately hired the most famous United States wine consultant of the postwar era,
André Tchelistcheff. Cabernet sauvignon, pinot noir, sémillon, and grenache were the first
varieties the winery produced.
                                 CHATEAU STE. MICHELLE
 The seventh-largest winery in the United States is also the godmother of the Washington State wine
 industry: Chateau Ste. Michelle. During the 1980s and 1990s, Chateau Ste. Michelle—with its
 considerable financial, enological, and viticultural resources—helped push Washington State into the
 limelight, and in the process created a market for the wines of countless top-notch small wineries like
 Leonetti Cellar, Cayuse, and Betz Family. Ste. Michelle, owned by the tobacco company Altria (the
 parent company of Philip Morris), farms more than 3,500 acres (1,400 hectares) of vineyards in the state
 and contracts with growers for another 17,000 acres (6,900 hectares); indeed, some 60 percent of all
 vineyard acreage in Washington State is devoted to grapes grown for Ste. Michelle. The winery, which
 produces 2 million cases a year of good to very good wine, also owns several other brands, including
 Columbia Crest (one of the best brands in the U.S. for inexpensive, easy-drinking, every-night wines),
 Northstar, Spring Valley, Col Solare (a joint venture with Italy’s Piero Antinori), and Eroica (a joint venture
 with Germany’s Dr. Loosen), plus two wineries in California’s Napa Valley: Conn Creek and (famously)
 Stag’s Leap Wine Cellars.

   For the next twenty years, the Washington State wine industry moved steadily along the
quality track. Every winery, from Chateau Ste. Michelle to the smallest family-run
operation, was on a steep learning curve, for Washington had almost nothing in common
—climatically or geographically—with its neighbors to the south, Oregon and California.
What it did share with the wine industries of these states was the discovery that the best
teacher was trial and error.
     THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Were it not for several cold mountain rivers—the Columbia, the Yakima, the Snake, and
the Walla Walla—eastern Washington would be a desert. Rainfall here is no more than 8
inches (20 centimeters) per year on average (compared to western Washington’s 48
inches/122 centimeters). But the river valleys and the irrigation they make possible have
transformed the vast expanse into hauntingly beautiful rangeland, wheat fields, and
orchards. Plus prime vineyards.
    The dryness of the climate is only one of the factors that give Washington its distinct
viticultural personality. Because of its northern latitude, the vineyards here get an average
of two more hours of sun per day than vineyards in California’s Sonoma County or Napa
Valley. Temperatures are very warm but, again because of the latitude, not excessively hot.
The extended hours of light and warmth (but not severe heat) help ripening progress
evenly.
   The day-to-night temperature contrast in eastern Washington can be remarkable—a
difference of 50°F (28°C) or more in a single day is not uncommon. This diurnal
temperature fluctuation is categorically good, for cool nights mean that grapevines can
temporarily shut down and rest, thereby preserving acidity in the grapes.




 Long Shadows Winery’s vineyard, known as The Benches, is poised 1,400 feet (427 meters) above the grand Columbia
        River. The vineyard includes twenty-seven geologically created “benches” formed 20,000 years ago.

   Sometimes, however, temperature drops can be lethal to vines. Brutal winters with fast-
moving, subzero arctic winds are one of the most severe threats in eastern Washington.
Temperatures may go from 40°F (about 4°C) to well below zero (–18°C) in a matter of a
few hours. In situations such as this, water in the plants’ system freezes so quickly, the
vines can literally explode.
   Soils in Washington are a mix of sand, silt, gravel, and volcanic ash—the result of two
cataclysmic events. First, some 140 million years ago, the crashing together of the tectonic
plate beneath the Pacific Ocean and the North American Plate resulted in an uplifted chain
of highly pressurized volcanoes (consider Mount St. Helens) parallel to the coast. These
systematically and repeatedly erupted all along the northern part of the western United
States. Then, about 15 million years ago (during the last Ice Age), the repeated freezing
and melting of a colossal ice dam resulted in massive floods—known as the Missoula
Floods—covering the entire Columbia Basin of Washington, along with much of Oregon,
Idaho, and Montana, in fast-moving water and depositing nutrient-poor sand, silt, and
gravel as the water traveled toward the Pacific Ocean.
   Indeed, perhaps because of the state’s sandy soils and very cold winter climate,
phylloxera—the deadly insect that, in the late nineteenth century, damaged most of the
vineyards in the world, including those in California and Oregon—has never destroyed
vineyards in Washington State (the pest has occasionally shown up for a few days at a
time, probably brought in on farm equipment). As a result, 99 percent of the vineyards
here are planted on their own roots, not on phylloxera-tolerant rootstock. Does that make a
difference in flavor? Some winemakers believe it does, arguing that slight differences in
any aspect of a wine’s terroir affect flavor. Other winemakers disagree, saying that, in a
blind tasting, no one has ever been able to differentiate wines grown on their own roots
from wines grown on rootstock.
                    THE GRAPES OF WASHINGTON STATE
                                              WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: A major grape; a source of wines that are dependably good but rarely extraordinary.
 CHENIN BLANC: A minor grape that can become a delicious or merely decent wine.
 MADELEINE ANGEVINE: A very minor variety but appealing for its pleasing, offbeat floral character.
 Most of what is grown in the world is found in England.
 MUSCAT CANELLI: A minor variety, the same as muscat blanc à petits grains. It can turn into simple but
 delightful sweet wines.
 RIESLING: A very important grape; the top wines made from it are extraordinary, and even more modest
 versions can be very attractive, snappy, peachy, and minerally. It is made into dry, off-dry, and sweet
 wines.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: A minor grape; the top wines are appealingly fresh, clean, and herbal-tasting.
 SIEGERREBE: A very minor grape, but a curiosity, grown in the Puget Sound region. It is thought to be a
 cross of Madeleine Angevine and gewürztraminer, bred in Germany in 1929.

                                                REDS
 CABERNET FRANC: A minor grape, but it shows potential, especially in blends with merlot and/or
 cabernet sauvignon.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: A major grape capable of making powerful, rich, balanced wines with
 structure and depth. It is used alone and blended with merlot.
 LEMBERGER: A very minor but interesting grape, traditionally grown in Germany and Austria (where it’s
 known as blaufränkisch). Washington State has the only significant plantings in the United States.
 MERLOT: A major grape and the source of many of the state’s most lush, concentrated, beautifully
 balanced wines. It is used alone and blended with cabernet sauvignon.
 SYRAH: A major grape that has achieved impressive success over the past ten years, making
 Washington State one of the best places in the U.S. for this variety.

   As for grapes, while cabernet sauvignon, merlot, chardonnay, riesling, and syrah (in
that order) clearly lead production, with cabernet franc, malbec, pinot gris, and sauvignon
blanc following, winemakers here also grow tiny amounts of grapes that almost no one has
ever heard of, such as Madeleine Angevine (grown mostly in England), siegerrebe (a
German cross), and Lemberger (grown mostly in Germany and Austria as blaufränkisch).
Despite having a name that makes marketing executives wince, Lemberger can make rich,
dark, spicy reds; Madeleine Angevine makes easy-to-like, very floral white wines; and
siegerrebe grows in the Puget Sound wine region, where rainfall can broach 48 inches
(122 centimeters) a year.
   With 43,800 acres (17,700 hectares) of grapevines, Washington State is a far smaller
wine producer than California, where there are 543,000 acres (219,700 hectares) of vines.
Of Washington’s thirteen appellations, Columbia Valley, as we noted, is the largest. It
extends over one third of the state’s entire landmass—some 11 million acres (4.5 million
hectares). The appellation is bordered on the north by the Okanagan wilderness, near
Canada, on the south by Oregon (the appellation is actually shared by the two states), and
on the east by the Snake River and Idaho. Almost 99 percent of the state’s total production
comes from this single appellation. Like large appellations in premium winegrowing areas
everywhere, Columbia Valley contains smaller appellations, including Yakima Valley,
Horse Heaven Hills, Walla Walla Valley, and many others.
  The Yakima Valley, within Columbia Valley, is generally considered the heart of
Washington wine country. Here, some of the state’s most established wineries, including
Hogue, are clustered fairly close together, and many other wineries buy Yakima grapes.
Within Yakima Valley are three smaller AVAs: Rattlesnake Hills, Snipes Mountain, and
Red Mountain.
   Despite its small size, Walla Walla Valley, within Columbia Valley, boasts some of
Washington’s best wineries, including historic ones such as Leonetti Cellar, Woodward
Canyon, and L’Ecole No 41, all of which helped put Washington State and Walla Walla on
the map—as well as newer, top-notch wineries like Cayuse, Gramercy Cellars, K
Vintners/Charles Smith Wines, and Long Shadows.
   Finally, a word on Puget Sound, which could seem more of a curiosity than a wine
region. The area, close to Seattle, spreads over islands in the Pacific Ocean and over
Washington State lands that adjoin the sound itself. The climate in this western part of the
state is very wet, and thus the forty-five wineries that are located here generally buy their
grapes from the eastern (dry) side of the Cascades. That said, some wineries maintain a
buy-local focus, growing Madeleine Angevine, siegerrebe, and pinot noir.
        SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF WASHINGTON’S BIG REDS:
              CABERNET SAUVIGNON, MERLOT, AND SYRAH
   Andrew Will Winery • Betz Family • Boudreaux Cellars • Cadence • Cayuse • Chateau Ste. Michelle • Col
  Solare • DeLille Cellars • Den Hoed • Doubleback • Fidelitas • Force Majeure • Gorman • Hestia • Januik •
 L’Ecole No 41 • Leonetti Cellar • Long Shadows (Pirouette, Sequel) • Mark Ryan • Matthews Cellars • Owen
  Roe • Pepper Bridge Winery • Quilceda Creek Vintners • Rasa Vineyards • Reynvaan • Sheridan • Sleight
                             of Hand • Sparkman • Woodward Canyon • Zero One


                   WHEN YOU VISIT… WASHINGTON STATE
          A MAJORITY of Washington State’s wineries are in rural eastern Washington. The
          Yakima Valley, for example, is about a two-and-a-half-hour drive from Seattle; Walla
          Walla, five hours. That said, the drive over the Cascade Mountains can in itself be an
          exhilarating part of the journey.
          DESPITE THE FACT ABOVE, several small top wineries have tasting rooms in
          Woodinville, less than an hour from Seattle, and Chateau Ste. Michelle, Washington’s
          largest winery (very much worth visiting), is also here.
          FINALLY, a food lover alert: The icy bays and estuaries around Puget Sound are home
          to a wide variety of Pacific Northwest oysters, from the thumbnail-size Olympias to
          those named after the bays from which they come, such as Penn Cove, Westcott Bay,
          and Shoalwater Bay. Pacific Northwest oysters, generally more briny and minerally than
          East Coast or Southern varieties, are a perfect match for Washington State’s crisp,
          minerally dry rieslings.
              The Washington State Wines to Know
                                                  WHITES




                              CHATEAU STE. MICHELLE AND DR. LOOSEN

                                 RIESLING | EROICA | COLUMBIA VALLEY
                                                  100% riesling
Eroica (the name means “heroic” in Italian) is a joint venture between Washington State’s Chateau Ste. Michelle
and Germany’s Weingut Dr. Loosen. While commonplace today, joint ventures were relatively new in 1999, when
the Eroica project began, and time has proved the collaboration a huge success. Stunning nectarine and peach
aromas lure you in to a flavor that’s minerally and beautifully refined. Although the grapes were grown in
Washington State’s Columbia Valley, Eroica has the Mosel’s penchant for clarity, lightness, and freshness. Eroica
was the name Beethoven gave to his passionate Third Symphony, a musical metaphor for this wine.
                                                    POET’S LEAP

                                         RIESLING | COLUMBIA VALLEY
                                                     100% riesling
This is wine masquerading as a butterfly. Ethereally light and lacy, it dances (hovers) on the palate with great
delicacy. The aromas and flavors of pear, green apple, and orange citrus are as sheer as possible. Exquisite lightness
like this is, in a sense, the spiritual side of wine, and is hard to achieve in fine wine. Poet’s Leap is part of the Long
Shadows portfolio (all of which are joint ventures between visionary businessman and former CEO of Chateau Ste.
Michelle Allen Shoup, and notable winemakers from around the world). Poet’s Leap was made by the German
winemaker Armin Diel.
                                     WOODWARD CANYON
                                    CHARDONNAY | WASHINGTON STATE
                                                100% chardonnay
Founded in Walla Walla in 1981 by Rick and Darcey Fugman-Small, Woodward Canyon has always been known
for its well-structured reds—especially its cabernet sauvignons. But the beauty of their chardonnays is indisputable.
And while many wineries make very good cabernets in Washington State, it’s a rare artistic achievement to make
very good chardonnay. The wine moves from stone fruit to star fruit, from the familiar to the exotic. It’s lovely,
balanced, and long—so long you feel like someone has thrown a stone in a pond, and you’re watching the endless
circles of ripples that flow from the center.

                                                     REDS
                                                    SPARKMAN

                                    DARKNESS | SYRAH | YAKIMA VALLEY
                                                     100% syrah
The name of this wine, Darkness, says it all. Drinking it was like being in some dark, shadowy coffeehouse
drinking espresso. The gamyness, the spices, the coffee and cocoa, the sense of black licorice and black pepper—
it’s all dark. Wines like Darkness are tailor-made for dark winter nights. Sparkman, a relative newcomer on the
Washington scene, makes wines from a number of varieties, red and white. But by far its best wines are syrahs.




                                                    K VINTNERS

                                  PHEASANT VINEYARD | WAHLUKE SLOPE
                                                     100% syrah
As animal as it gets. Every carnivorous thing you can think of seems woven together here—the fatty, cured smells
of salami… the tantalizing, umami-rich flavors of meat juices… the gamy, savory, sexy flavor of roast lamb. And
woven through all that are whiplashes of minerals and stones. Outrageous, almost foreboding syrah like this is more
often the product of the Rhône Valley of France than it is of the New World, but K Vintners has captured it. The
winery, begun in 2001 by self-taught winemaker Charles Smith (a former rock band manager), initially focused on
syrah, hence the “K” in its name (que sera, sera; get it?). But the way I see it, K could also stand for “killer” syrah.
                                               DELILLE CELLARS

                                     CHALEUR ESTATE | RED MOUNTAIN
    Approximately 65% cabernet sauvignon, 25% merlot, and tiny amounts of cabernet franc and petit
                                             verdot
For more than a decade, DeLille’s Chaleur Estate has been one of the top Bordeaux-style blends in Washington
State. The wine’s refinement and structure look toward Bordeaux, but the intense cassis fruit and the creamy echo
of melted chocolate speak to Washington. Best of all, and for all of its richness, the wine has lift and grace on the
palate. Chaleur Estate’s baby brother—known as D2—is packed with juicy, spicy black cherry flavors threaded
with notes of stones, savory herbs, and sea salt.
                                              LEONETTI CELLAR

                                           RESERVE | WALLA WALLA
           Approximately 50% cabernet sauvignon, 30% merlot, plus cabernet franc and malbec
Founded by Gary and Nancy Figgins in 1977, on their family’s farm begun in 1906, Leonetti Cellar was the first
commercial winery in the then unknown appellation of Walla Walla. The quality of its initial wines was shockingly
good. Now, more than three decades later, the winery continues its reputation as one of the greatest wine estates not
only in Washington State but on the entire West Coast. Indeed, it was hard to choose which Leonetti wine to write
about, for they are all magnificent. In the end, the Reserve won out for the sheer number of exclamation marks in
the margins next to my original notes. Leonetti’s Reserve is both elegant and mighty at the same time, rather like a
Gothic arch that can both be exquisitely graceful and hold up the cathedral.
                                                LONG SHADOWS

                                       PIROUETTE | COLUMBIA VALLEY
           Approximately 55% cabernet sauvignon, 25% merlot, plus cabernet franc and malbec
This is quite simply an extraordinary wine made by some of the best wine pros in the United States. Refined, yet
full of pent-up raw power, it’s cabernet sauvignon at its exquisite best. The wine comes onto the palate with classic
First Growth Bordeaux-like cassis flavors, then slowly unleashes itself in a torrent of savory deliciousness. The
minds behind this remarkable wine are the joint-venture team of Allen Shoup (founder of Long Shadows), Agustin
Huneeus Sr. (founder of Quintessa), and the remarkable Napa Valley-based winemaker Philippe Melka.
OREGON

If Oregon had been established as a wine region during the Middle Ages, it would
undoubtedly have been the work of monks, for only those with an ascetic temperament
(and considerable faith) could find joy in the nail-biting, nerve-racking reality of Oregon
viticulture. Growing grapes here is fraught with challenges. Sunlight and heat can be in
short supply; ripening, as a result, is never a given. Rain (about 40 inches/102 centimeters
a year in the Willamette Valley) and frost can be threats during spring and fall—the two
times when grapes are most vulnerable. Weather patterns can be erratic (you need
sunglasses one minute, an umbrella the next)—a stressful scenario for vines, which, like
all plants, love constancy and stability.
   And yet it’s precisely the marginality of Oregon’s climate, along with the state’s unique
geologic past, that forms the cradle of its success as a wine region. Grapes here cannot
burst into ripeness, but instead must make their way slowly and methodically toward
maturity and complexity. Each year is a gamble, but when the forces of nature align with
skilled winemaking, Oregon wines of utter beauty, focus, and finesse emerge.
   When I wrote about Oregon in the first edition of The Wine Bible, the wine industry
there was tiny, and the wines were sometimes surprisingly wonderful, sometimes sadly
wanting. Then, in the first decade of the twenty-first century, Oregon turned the big
corner. It had long since given up California as a viticultural and winemaking role model.
Next, France, too, was abandoned. As Oregon winemakers set out on their own vinous
course, they began to forge a new way of working with the unique demands of their land.
The result has been a mega-leap in quality—especially for the state’s signature pinot noirs.
If wines can be graceful and luscious, if they can have richness without heaviness, then
Oregon is the place to find them.

                              THE NINETY PERCENT LAW
    While Oregon, of course, abides by U.S. wine laws, the state has opted to make some wine regulations
    stricter. For example, according to state regulations the leading Oregon wine types—pinot noir,
    chardonnay, and pinot gris—must contain at least 90 percent of whatever grape variety is named on the
    label (as opposed to the U.S. law, which mandates a minimum of 75 percent). Several grapes, however,
    are excepted from the Oregon 90 percent rule: Cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, merlot, syrah,
    sauvignon blanc, and several others that are thought to benefit from greater blending need only be 75
    percent of the grape named.
                              THE QUICK SIP ON OREGON
         OREGON’S SPECIALTY is pinot noir, a delicate and temperamental grape considered
         by many to make the most sensual red wines in the world.
         OREGON’S RELATIVELY COOL, marginal climate is a major factor in the elegance
         that characterizes its top wines.
         MOST OF THE STATE’S best wines come from a group of small appellations that make
         up the Willamette Valley, in the northwest corner of the state.




        The late David Lett (left) with son Jason. David Lett is considered the father of Oregon pinot noir.

   Although a number of small wineries struggled along prior to Prohibition, the modern
Oregon wine industry takes 1961 as the date of its birth. In that year, Richard Sommer, a
graduate in agronomy from the University of California at Davis, planted riesling and
other grapes at Hillcrest Vineyard in the Umpqua Valley. Four years later, David Lett,
another UC Davis graduate, planted the state’s first pinot noir at Eyrie Vineyards, in the
long valley south of Portland known as the Willamette (rhymes with dammit, as locals are
fond of saying). Both men were warned by university professors that vinifera-species
grapes would not fare well in Oregon. And with that piece of advice unheeded, the Oregon
wine industry was born.
   Today there are more than 20,000 acres (8,100 hectares) of grapes and more than three
hundred wineries in the state. Most of them grow pinot noir, the great (if fragile) red grape
of Burgundy, France. Indeed, Oregon is one of only a few regions in the New World to be
manically focused on a single grape variety.
   While the story of Oregon is definitively the story of pinot noir, other grape varieties
are also grown, albeit in far smaller amounts. Most are white. Among these whites,
chardonnay is thought to have the most potential. Pinot gris is appreciated as a no-fuss
local favorite that, as one winemaker puts it, “you drink while you’re deciding which pinot
noir to have.” And finally, there’s riesling. A dry riesling renaissance has swept Oregon,
with several dozen winemakers now making small-production lots of this cool-climate
grape.
   Oregon wine country comprises four major regions, but the Willamette Valley is
certainly the most important. Tucked into the northwest corner of the state, just south of
Portland, and running north-south for 100 miles (160 kilometers), this corridor of soft,
green hills could be visually described as the Vermont of the West. Here, more than two-
thirds of the state’s wines, including most of the best, are made. This one place—
Willamette Valley—has put Oregon on the international wine map and indeed, has become
virtually synonymous with “Oregon wine.” So while some good wines are indeed made in
the Umpqua, Rogue, and Applegate valleys, as well as in eastern Oregon in the Walla
Walla region (which Oregon shares with Washington State), this chapter will focus on the
Willamette Valley. Lastly, Oregon winemakers are a story in themselves. Independently
minded farmers at heart, a surprising number of them are dropouts or exes. Dropouts from
big-city life. Ex-high-tech execs. Dropouts from college. Ex-professors. Dropouts from
the counter-culture. Ex-theologians. A growing number are even ex-California
winemakers.
  Of course, many Oregon winemakers have enology degrees, but it doesn’t always
matter, for in Oregon, the greatest (most demanding) teacher remains Nature herself.
                    THE (INCONCEIVABLE) LAND

Like California’s, Oregon’s geologic history is fascinating and violent. Here’s a quick
window into that past.
   In a brutal collision some 140 million years ago, the tectonic plate beneath the Pacific
Ocean crashed against the North American Plate and began to subduct, or plunge,
underneath it. The massive crunch thrust up the sea bottom, creating the mountainous
western coast of the United States, including much of Oregon. The mountainous landmass
of uplifted seabed lay relatively still for millennia. Then, some fifteen million years ago,
the volcanoes that formed Idaho’s Blue Range Mountains erupted in a fury of wicked and
immense activity. Hot lava spewed from the epicenter, covering the seabed with molten
rock 1,000 feet (300 meters) deep. Such was the force behind the lava that it quickly
oozed across the entire state of Oregon a potent flood of fiery volcanic sludge. Once
cooled, the lava became a type of rock called basalt.

                 THE MOST IMPORTANT OREGON WINES
                                    LEADING WINES
         CHARDONNAY white
         PINOT GRIS white
         PINOT NOIR red
         RIESLING white

   It was just the beginning. Some 15,000 years ago, during one of the earth’s coldest
periods, at the end of the last Ice Age (15,000 to 25,000 years ago), massive ice dams in
Montana were breached, sending walls of water rushing toward the Pacific Ocean at a
speed of 60 miles (97 kilometers) per hour. The entire Columbia River basin flooded.
Over two thousand years, the Missoula Floods, as they became known, occurred again and
again, each time creating a huge glacial lake where the Willamette Valley is today. The
floods broke down the basalt in places and, in the process, deposited hundreds of feet of
rich sediment on the floor of the valley.
                       OREGON, WOMEN, AND PINOT NOIR
 Oregon has more women wine-makers than California does, despite having one-twenty-seventh the
 grape acreage. Indeed, in the one U.S. state devoted to pinot noir, women account for 10 percent of all
 winemakers. The question seems obvious: Do women choose pinot noir? Or does it choose them?
    I asked Lynn Penner-Ash, who in 1988 became the first female winemaker in Oregon, her view.
 Recounting the early days, she says, “Oregon was made up of small family-owned wineries and was just
 starting to understand the business of making and selling wine. Winemakers were eager to learn and
 eager to help establish Oregon as a place for world-class pinot noir. Female or male, if you were willing
 to work hard at making pinot, you were welcome.” But Penner-Ash says there are also more subtle
 powers at work. “Pinot noir is a reflective grape. We strive to be guardians of it, but not dominators, which
 some might say reflects a more feminine sensibility.”


   Fast-forward to our time. All of the top vineyards of Willamette Valley exist above that
fertile valley floor. The vineyards exist on “islands” of basalt (cooled lava), or ancient,
uplifted marine seabed (sandy sediment), or windblown sand and silt (loess). Or
sometimes a little of all three. From any one of the hilltops of the Willamette, this part of
the distant past can be sensed immediately. The rich valley floor, barren of grapes, is lush
with (and perfect for) grass. The vineyards—impeccably manicured—all begin rolling at
about 200 feet (60 meters) up the slopes of numerous hills.




                            Stoller Vineyards, in the Willamette Valley’s Dundee Hills.

   I will never forget the stark yet somehow gentle beauty of these vineyards. To reach
them, you often wind along roads that are still dirt. Rare breeds of sheep graze. Swollen,
slate-colored clouds drifting in off the Pacific Ocean sometimes hang in ponderous
skepticism above the grapes.
   As in Tuscany, there are no straight lines in the Willamette Valley. To drive is to
meander up and down and around not just vineyards, but endless hazelnut orchards (more
than 95 percent of the hazelnuts in the U.S. are grown here); forests of fir, oak, and maple;
plus fields and fields of Christmas trees—an employment boon if you’re an agricultural
worker with little vineyard work in winter. (In the 1970s, land here cost $1,000 an acre;
approximately $2,500 a hectare. Today prices broach $30,000 an acre; $74,000 per
hectare).
    Befitting this pastoral landscape, the wineries themselves are modest and farmlike. No
châteaus, not even ranchettes. The state’s progressive land-use laws stipulate that wineries
must be true working wineries—each winery must earn a minimum of 75 percent of its
revenue from the sale of wine (not baseball caps, jams, aprons, etc.). Plus there’s a legal
ratio of land to gallons produced. For example, anyone producing 50,000 to 150,000
gallons (1,900 to 5,700 hectoliters) of wine must have a corresponding parcel of 40 acres
(16 hectares) of land. Mansions with “lifestyle vineyards” don’t fit the bill.
                                 THE CLIMATE

The vineyards of Willamette Valley are, for the most part, protected from the wet, cold
onslaughts of the Pacific Ocean by a small chain of mountains known as the Coast Range.
Winemakers here call it the first line of defense. The only gap in the range—the Van
Duzer Corridor—is the one Achilles’ heel. Still, while rain on the coast is often in excess
of 80 inches (200 centimeters) a year, it’s less than half that in Willamette Valley.
Nonetheless, the region is generally cooler and wetter than its wine-producing neighbors,
California and Washington State.
    Importantly, however, most of the rain falls in winter—when the vines are dormant.
And thus, the best growing seasons in Oregon are sunny—light at this northern latitude
lasts until 10:00 p.m. in summer—but still relatively cool. (Locals report that, more than
once, they’ve worn a down jacket to Fourth of July fireworks celebrations.) A cool
growing season allows grapes to ripen slowly. And slow ripening, in turn, is the critical
criterion for making Oregon’s elegant style of top-notch pinot noirs. These pinots have a
hum of acidity—a brightness and delicacy that defines them. They are just-ripe fruity, but
not hot-sun jammy.
   As for chardonnay, pinot gris, and riesling, the same cool climate that lends itself to
well-balanced, earthy pinot noirs gives these white grapes a natural restraint. Of course,
any wine-maker with money to spare could override this inherent “quietness” with rap-
music-like wine-making (lots of extraction) and a million dollars’ worth of new oak
barrels. Whether for philosophic or economic reasons (or both), this usually doesn’t
happen in Oregon. But there are some exceptions.
       THE APPELLATIONS WITHIN WILLAMETTE
                     VALLEY

In the early 2000s, the winemakers of Willamette Valley came together and collectively
mapped out six small areas within the valley that were ultimately given their own status as
AVAs (American Viticultural Areas) in 2004, 2005, and 2006.
   Each of these appellations begins about 200 feet (60 meters) above the valley floor and
rises to about 1,000 feet (300 meters; above that, the climate here is too cool for grapes).
Here is a short sketch on each, with a quick—but in no way complete—list of producers to
seek out. Keep in mind that many top producers—Ken Wright and Bergström, for example
—make excellent wines from virtually every AVA, and thus aren’t listed below.
                                       THE DIJON CLONES
 One of the key drivers behind the vast improvement in Oregon wine in the 2000s was the widespread
 implementation of so-called Dijon clones. The University of Oregon was the first entity in the United
 States to bring in these clones of pinot noir and chardonnay (clones are genetic subtypes of a variety; for
 more information, see page 30). Named after Dijon, the city in Burgundy where France’s ONIVINS plant
 materials laboratory is located, the numerous Dijon clones (with exciting names like 115, 667, and 777)
 are heralded for their complex flavors and ability to ripen fully in cool climates. In addition to Dijon clones,
 Willamette Valley pinot noirs are also often made from the Pommard clone, another well-suited clone
 from Burgundy.


CHEHALEM MOUNTAINS
This is a single, 20-mile-long (32-kilometer) landmass made up of several hilltops and
ridges lifted up from the Willamette Valley floor. Parts of these hills (the south and
southeast slopes) are mostly basalt and marine sediment; the more northern-facing slopes
tend to be covered in loess. At more than 68,000 acres (27,500 hectares), this is the largest
AVA within the Willamette. My top picks among the best producers include Adelsheim,
Chehalem, and Ponzi.

DUNDEE HILLS
A small group of hills, Dundee is where the Willamette Valley’s first pinot noir was
planted, in 1965, by David Lett of Eyrie Vineyards. The area has unique red soils formed
from ancient volcanic basalt. My top picks among the best producers include De Ponte,
Domaine Drouhin, Stoller, and Domaine Serene.

EOLA-AMITY HILLS
This AVA is due west of the Van Duzer Corridor, a gap in the Coast Range, and thus is
cool, thanks to exposure to air flowing in from the Pacific Ocean. Soils are a combination
of volcanic basalt and marine sediment. My top picks among the best producers include
Bethel Heights and Cristom.
Evesham Wood Winery, in the Willamette Valley’s Eola-Amity Hills.
                               THE GRAPES OF OREGON
                                               WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: Considered the leading white grape in terms of potential; wines made from it range in
 quality from good to very good.
 PINOT GRIS: The leading white grape in terms of production. A white variant of pinot noir, in Oregon it’s
 usually made into popular, easy-to-like crisp whites.
 RIESLING: An up-and-coming white, mostly made into light, fresh, dry wines, although there are some
 stunning examples of sweet dessert rieslings.

                                                 REDS
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON, SYRAH, AND MERLOT: Minor grapes in Oregon, these are grown in the
 southern and eastern parts of the state. Their success is highly dependent on mesoclimates and
 producers.
 PINOT NOIR: Oregon’s most prestigious grape—virtually every winery in Willamette Valley grows it. It
 makes aromatic, elegant, earthy wines with supple textures.


MCMINNVILLE
Just west of the famous wine town of McMinnville, the AVA sits in a rain shadow of the
Coast Range and is thus relatively warm and dry. It has shallow, uplifted marine
sedimentary soils. My top picks among the best producers include Brittan and Yamhill
Valley.

RIBBON RIDGE
The smallest of the AVAs, Ribbon Ridge is contained within the Chehalem Mountains
AVA. It is an “island” of old silty/clay sedimentary soils, well protected by geographical
features on all sides and thus a relatively moderate climate. My top picks among the best
producers include Beaux Frères and Brick House.

YAMHILL-CARLTON
The AVA surrounds the hamlets of Yamhill and Carlton on coarse-grained, ancient marine
sedimentary soils. Top producers include Shea, Soter, Penner-Ash, and Elk Cove. In
addition, the highly important Burgundy firm Louis Jadot, which bought vineyard land
here in 2013, will be a producer to watch.
                                   PINOT NOIR

Because Oregon, and the Willamette Valley in particular, is so strongly associated with
pinot noir, a few words on the character of these wines is in order.
   The best Oregon pinots possess what might be called a complex and quiet
compellingness. They are rarely (if ever) dense, alcoholic blockbusters. Instead, the best
of them offer a unique richness of supple fruit, without weight—the kind of pinot noir that
would make a Burgundian monk genuflect. In fact, the kind of pinot noir that follows
more in the tradition of Vosne Romanée than Santa Lucia Highlands.
                                             PAPA PINOT
 A photo in the February 16, 1967, Newberg Graphic Farm News shows a smiling young couple in heavy
 jackets and work boots, standing behind a wheelbarrow heaped with roots. The caption reads, “David
 and Diana Lett, who recently purchased the John Marner place in Dundee, pause with their European
 wine grape rootings. The Letts plan to remove prunes from the 20-acre farm and put in quality wine
 grapes.”
    The town’s farmers thought David Lett was crazy, of course. And, in a way, he was possessed—by an
 idea. Namely, that finesse and complexity in wine were related to the marginality of the climate where the
 grapes were grown. In other words, grapes that had it easy, that ripened effortlessly thanks to
 unmitigating sun, would never make elegant wine. On the other hand, grapes that lived on the edge, that
 received barely enough sun to help them cross the finish line of ripeness, had at least a chance of
 making graceful wine.
    Lett had earned a degree in viticulture at the University of California at Davis, but his thinking had
 been shaped even more pivotally by wandering around French vineyards for a year. The lesson out
 there, among the vines, seemed to be that grapes were sort of like life: No pain, no gain.
    Lett had his mind set on pinot noir, and he planted it, along with pinot gris, riesling, and several other
 grapes that do well in cool, marginal climates. Eventually, other pioneer winemakers joined him. In the
 process, Oregon established itself as a wine region built not on trends, not on marketing strategies, not
 on the personal wine preferences of the vintner, but on the simple reality of its own terroir. David Lett,
 whose nickname was Papa Pinot, is today considered the father of Oregon pinot noir. Lett passed away
 in 2008.

   The flavors of these pinots often seem to mirror the land itself, with their forest floor,
wild mushroom, and brambly characteristics, circling a core of sweet, ripe berries. These
aromas and flavors often get more vivid with time. Indeed, some of the most spell-binding
Oregon pinot noirs I’ve tasted have been fifteen to thirty years old (this sort of
ageworthiness is especially remarkable given that the entire Oregon wine industry is still
quite young).

      “[Great Oregon pinot noir] . . . is about the complete power of gracefulness.
      When I’m drinking a pinot noir, I want it to taste like Grace Kelly just walked
      into the room.”
                                                                           — ROLLIN SOLES,
                                                                       winemaker, Argyle Winery

   Then there’s the issue of what I call “cool-climate lag time.” Which is to say that
almost no really good Oregon pinot noir tastes full-on the minute it’s poured. In my
experience, the best of these wines hit their stride and open up to a plethora of flavors
twenty or more minutes after that. I wonder how many people have missed the beauty of a
given Oregon pinot simply because they took one quick sip, then moved on.
   But above all, the story of Oregon pinot is the story of texture. The best wines have a
gentle feel of succulence—a sweet, palate-clinging character that is sometimes described
as “sappy.”
                                   A PARTNER FOR PINOT
In the United States, the sumptuous combination of grilled salmon and Oregon pinot noir was the first
well-known food and wine marriage to forsake the old chestnut: white wine with fish; red wine with meat.
And that it did brilliantly, for as anyone who has tasted grilled salmon and Oregon pinot noir together
knows, the two are a consummate match. The rich fattiness and light char of the grilled salmon could
have no better partner than an earthy Oregon pinot noir, with its relatively high (for red wine) acidity. Also
critical to the partnership is the fact that pinot noir is very low in tannin, and thus doesn’t interfere with the
beautiful flavors of the fish. (By contrast, wines that are high in tannin, such as cabernet sauvignon, often
make fish taste dry or metallic.) The biggest testament to the success of Oregon pinot noir and salmon
happens each year on the final night of the wild and fantastic International Pinot Noir Celebration, when
600 pounds (272 kilograms) of chinook salmon are consumed with no one knows how many bottles of
pinot noir.


 SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF WILLAMETTE VALLEY PINOT NOIR
Adelsheim • Amity • Anam Cara • Argyle • Beaux Frères • Belle Pente • Bergström • Bethel Heights • Brick
House • Brittan • Broadley • Carter • Chehalem • Cristom • De Ponte • Domaine Drouhin • Domaine Serene
• Elk Cove • Erath • Et Fille • Evening Land • Evesham Wood • Ken Wright • Panther Creek • Penner-Ash •
  Ponzi • Raptor Ridge • REX HILL • Shea • Soter • St. Innocent • Stoller • The Eyrie Vineyards • Yamhill
                                                   Valley
                                   CHARDONNAY

In Oregon—as in Burgundy and Champagne—chardonnay is considered pinot noir’s cool-
climate sister. When asked which white grape has the most potential for excellence here,
most Oregon winemakers name it. But Oregon chardonnay’s road to success has been
rocky, and the state is just beginning to produce the kind of stop-you-in-your-tracks
chardonnays that will command top dollar. I have to admit that, as of this writing, I’m only
cautiously optimistic.
   For the few really fabulous chardonnays, the quality surge has been largely the result of
new Dijon clones brought to Oregon from Burgundy and now widely planted. (Originally,
most Oregon chardonnay was made from a warm-climate California clone that didn’t
ripen well in Oregon’s cool climate, and thus produced thin, lean, bland wines.) Over the
coming decade, Dijon clones are expected to be the chardonnay equivalent of a rising tide
that lifts all boats.




                     The Willamette (rhymes with dammit) Valley is lush and serene.
                                      PEAR EXCELLENCE
 Although traditional in Europe for centuries, the making of handcrafted eaux-de-vie and fruit brandies is
 rare in the United States. Only a handful of tiny American distillers now practice the craft; among these is
 Clear Creek Distillery in Portland, Oregon. Clear Creek makes a pear brandy and an eau-de-vie de poire
 Williams that are two of the most extraordinary eaux-de-vie in America—indeed, in the world. To make
 them, perfectly ripe Williams pears (as the French call them; they’re Bartletts in the United States) from
 orchards in Parkdale, Oregon, are fermented and then distilled in German-made pot stills. Although the
 process sounds straightforward, enormous skill is required to achieve an eau-de-vie with intense fruit
 concentration that is smooth and elegant at the same time. Clear Creek’s eau-de-vie de poire Williams is
 especially renowned (and difficult to make) because it has an actual pear inside each bottle. To achieve
 this, empty bottles are carefully attached to tree limbs just after flowering. The pears actually grow inside
 the glass. After being rinsed with a special citric solution to sterilize the pears, the bottles are then filled
 with 80-proof pear eau-de-vie.




                In Oregon, the moody vineyards of Maresh Red Hills in winter have a special charm.

   There are already a few stunning examples—chardonnays that are elegant yet
thoroughly rich, with waves of citrus, quince, and nut and mineral flavors. In style, they
are closer to Burgundy than to California or Australia, and are rarely dominated by planky,
sweet oak flavors.
   Domaine Drouhin’s Edition Limitée, Bergström’s Sigrid, and Adelsheim’s Stoller are
already three of the best chardonnays in the United States.
                   WHEN YOU VISIT… OREGON
THE MAJORITY OF OREGON’S wineries are in the verdant Willamette Valley, an easy
drive from Portland. Most of these wineries are as welcoming and down-to-earth as
they come. Often the owner is also the winemaker, tour guide, and tractor operator. It’s
best to call ahead for an appointment.
OVER THE MEMORIAL DAY and Thanksgiving weekends, Oregon wineries host
massive open houses. Virtually every winery, no matter how tiny, is open for tastings
and tours, and there are usually heaps of food and music, to boot.
WHENEVER YOU VISIT, don’t miss a dinner at the Joel Palmer House, in Dayton, in
the Willamette Valley. Owned by Jack and Heidi Czarnecki, two of the leading wild-
mushroom experts in the United States and authors of several mushroom cookbooks,
the Joel Palmer House specializes in (what else?) mushroom dishes paired with
Oregon pinot noirs.
AS FOR PLACES TO STAY, my favorite B and B is the charming Black Walnut Inn in
Dundee, and the best hotel by far is the Allison, a sophisticated luxury property with
great food, a phenomenal spa, and a fantastically long list of exciting Oregon pinot
noirs.
                            The Oregon Wines to Know
                                                     WHITES




                                                    PENNER-ASH

                                        RIESLING | WILLAMETTE VALLEY
                                                     100% riesling
Lynn Penner-Ash makes such beautiful pinot noirs that it might seem unusual to write about her riesling. But this
delicious wine attests to just how good Oregon rieslings can be. Minerally and snappy, it’s got a thrilling purity of
pear and star fruit flavors. Refreshing? Kind of like a cold slap on a hot day.




                                                     CHEHALEM

                                              SEXT | RIBBON RIDGE
                                                     100% riesling
In 1990, Harry Peterson-Nedry, one of the early winemakers in Willamette Valley, founded Chehalem (a Native
American word meaning “valley of the flowers”). The winery makes beautiful pinot noirs and racy dry rieslings,
but you should also know about Sext, Chehalem’s fantastic, semi-sparkling dry riesling. It’s a hailstorm in your
mouth. Fresh, light flavors bolt around like electrons circling a core of apricots and other stone fruits. Liveliness is
the wine’s middle name.
                                                    BERGSTRÖM

                               CHARDONNAY | SIGRID | WILLAMETTE VALLEY
                                                  100% chardonnay
Josh Bergström, winemaker and co-owner, with his father and mother, John and Karen, named this extraordinary
wine after Josh’s Swedish grandmother. In luscious waves of golden richness, the flavors evoke images of quince,
buttery pie crust, baking spices, and roasted nuts. The texture—utterly creamy yet framed by precise acidity—is
reminiscent of great white Burgundy.




                                                         PONZI

                                       PINOT GRIS | WILLAMETTE VALLEY
                                                    100% pinot gris
Drinking this wine, it seemed as though perfectly ripe pears and juicy tangerines were being transmogrified right
then and there in the glass. Many wines, of course, are like fruit, but this wine seemed to be fruit. I like the wine not
only for its exquisite fruit-fulness but also because of its distinctiveness. It is far, far away from whispy pinot grigio,
and neither does it manifest an Alsace pinot gris’ gravitas. Instead, this good and beautiful wine has captured a split
second of pure flavor that is Oregon.

                                                        REDS
                                                BEAUX FRÈRES

                    PINOT NOIR | THE BEAUX FRÈRES VINEYARD | RIBBON RIDGE
                                                 100% pinot noir
Michael Etzel, winemaker and co-owner (with his brother-in-law, the wine critic Robert M. Parker Jr.) of Beaux
Frères, makes gorgeous pinot noirs. Sweetly ripe and lushly textured, they are at the same time majestically refined
and complex. To taste a great Beaux Frères pinot is to ride on wave after wave of sophisticated, sexy flavor.
Impossible to resist such hedonism.




                                                  ADELSHEIM

                  PINOT NOIR | CALKINS LANE VINEYARD | CHEHALEM MOUNTAINS
                                                 100% pinot noir
David Adelsheim was among the pioneers of pinot noir in Willamette Valley and was instrumental in bringing new
clones to the state. His wines continue to stand out for their beauty, balance, and integration. Suppleness and
earthiness are their signatures. And yet, waves of delicate cherry fruit are woven, like ribbons, through the wines.
Adelsheim makes many different pinots, but this one from Calkins Lane is a favorite.
                                              DOMAINE DROUHIN

                               PINOT NOIR | LOUISE CUVÉE | DUNDEE HILLS
                                                  100% pinot noir
Famous Burgundy vintner Robert Drouhin planted vineyards in Willamette Valley in 1988 and put his winemaker
daughter, Veronique, in charge. Louise Cuvée is named for Véronique’s daughter. Not surprisingly, this wine
possesses the finely tuned sensibilities of great Burgundy. It sways with the deep, primordial aromas of damp earth,
wild herbs, warm rocks, fall leaves, and the most “earthy” aroma of all—the sweet, sweaty smell of men (not a
pejorative by any means). The silky, supple texture here is enticing, and a marker for the top Oregon pinot noirs.




                                                   KEN WRIGHT

                               PINOT NOIR | SAVOYA | WILLAMETTE VALLEY
                                                  100% pinot noir
I have always thought that a prerequisite for great pinot noir is precision—a sense that the wine’s flavors are crystal
clear… like the sound of a church bell in the mountains. Ken Wright makes mind-blowing pinots like that. Savoya
(a phonetic reference to the wild onions the Spanish-speaking workers found in the vineyard) crests along a perfect
wave of suppleness, with sonorous flavors that are deeply earthy, berried, and spicy.
                                                       SOTER

                         PINOT NOIR | MINERAL SPRINGS | WILLAMETTE VALLEY
                                                  100% pinot noir
Winemaker Tony Soter began California’s Etude Winery, and made more than a decade’s worth of luscious
Carneros pinot noir before selling Etude and moving to Willamette Valley. The man knows how to coax gorgeous
fruit and spice from the earth. Soter’s pinots have an extra dimension and depth of flavor—like the puddle of berry
filling that oozed out of the pie while it baked, then fell onto the baking sheet, getting more and more concentrated
until you swiped it up with your finger and ate it.




                                                     STOLLER

                                 PINOT NOIR | SV ESTATE | DUNDEE HILLS
                                                  100% pinot noir
Stoller’s exquisite pinot noirs are a testimonial to texture. Sappy, supple, silky, sensual, succulent (have I missed
any other s words?). It was a Stoller pinot noir that first drove home for me the idea that pinot noir could have
richness without ponderous weight. The exotic aromas and flavors are reminiscent of things like anise and
sarsaparilla, with a smoky, peat bog kind of earthiness. Stoller is one of the biggest vineyards in the state, and many
top producers (besides the Stollers themselves) make wine from this vineyard.
NEW YORK STATE

The words New York generally evoke glamorous images of one of the world’s most high-
powered cities. But there is another New York as well, the New York of cornfields and
potato barns, of rolling farmland and flowing rivers, of sapphire-colored lakes and
graceful mountains. Much of New York State is, in fact, utterly and magnificently rural.
    What would become New York State was formed during the Ice Age, as receding
glaciers gouged out the Adirondack and Catskill mountains and carved deep passageways
that would become the Hudson and Mohawk river valleys. As the glaciers retreated north,
more than eight thousand lakes and ponds were created in the state. Eventually, these same
glaciers would hollow out the five massive Great Lakes, including Lake Erie and Lake
Ontario, which form parts of the northern and western borders of the state. In their wake,
the glaciers not only left behind bodies of water but also deep, well-drained soil. By the
time the colonists arrived, the area, already full of wild, indigenous vines, seemed
naturally poised to become an important place for grapes. And so it would become; by the
latter part of the twentieth century, New York State would have three major wine regions:
the Hudson River Valley, the Finger Lakes, and Long Island. These remain the three
important New York wine districts today.




 In the Finger Lakes region, the grapes themselves have the best views of the deep lakes created by receding glaciers.
        Native Americans believed the stunning lakes—shaped like fingers—to be the hand of the Great Spirit.
                      THE QUICK SIP ON NEW YORK STATE
         NEW YORK STATE’S modern wine industry, like all of the other major state wine
         industries, is based on fine wines made from vinifera species grape varieties. But up
         until two generations ago, the state was also known for a fascinating array of native
         American grapes and hybrids.
         NEW YORK’S COOL northern climate makes it well suited to producing not only dry,
         still table wines, but also lively sparkling wines, plus some excellent late-harvest and
         icewines.
         OF NEW YORK’S three major wine regions, the Finger Lakes is the fastest growing
         and accounts for almost half of the total wineries in the state.

    Although Dutch colonists attempted to grow grapes on Manhattan Island as early as
1647, viticulture and winemaking did not take serious hold until the nineteenth century,
when French, Dutch, and English immigrants began planting vineyards on the rolling hills
of the Hudson River Valley. From there, the immigrants pushed westward into the state’s
stunning, remote, lake-clad interior. In particular, the Finger Lakes benefited from waves
of German, French, and Swiss immigrants who were experienced at both grape growing
and winemaking, and by the 1870s the Finger Lakes had become the heart of the New
York wine industry. Steamboats laden with grapes and wine cruised back and forth doing a
brisk business among the wineries that ringed the lakes. With the founding of the Geneva
Experiment Station in the early 1880s, significant advances in grape breeding and
viticulture led to leaps in quality among Finger Lakes wines.
   The southern shores of Lake Erie, now one of the largest grape belts in the United
States, were also planted with grapes around this time. The region, however, soon became
a political stronghold for America’s nascent temperance movement. All too soon, growers
who might have planted wine grapes were focusing on table grapes instead. Indeed,
because grapes grown in the Lake Erie region today are mainly destined for jelly and juice
(not wine), I’ve left the region out of this chapter.

                                  POLITICAL BEGINNINGS
    Two of the most culturally significant political movements in the history of the United States began in the
    wine regions of New York State: the temperance movement and the women’s rights movement. The
    temperance movement began in Saratoga Springs and quickly spread to the Lake Erie region as early as
    1808, eventually culminating in national Prohibition in 1920. The women’s rights movement began in
    Seneca Falls, in the Finger Lakes, with the first Women’s Rights Convention in 1848.

   From the end of Prohibition until the mid-1970s, the New York wine industry was
controlled by a few powerful companies. As of 1976, there were only nineteen wineries in
the state, most of them specializing in native American grapes, crosses, and hybrids. Small
growers, their hands tied by exorbitant New York State licensing fees and bureaucratic red
tape, grew grapes for a handful of big wineries rather than creating fine-wine brands of
their own. By the middle of the 1970s, New York’s reputation as a producer of high-
quality wines seemed to be sliding downhill fast.
  In 1976, the critical turnaround came with the passage of the Farm Winery Act, which
made operating a small winery economically feasible by permitting direct sales to
restaurants, wine stores, and consumers. Within seven years, nearly fifty small farm
wineries had opened for business. Today, with the exception of the state’s sole very large
winery, Canandaigua Wine Company (itself part of Constellation Wines), the majority of
New York’s 283 wineries are small to medium in size.

          THE MOST IMPORTANT NEW YORK STATE WINES
                                       LEADING WINES
         CABERNET FRANC red
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MERLOT red
         RIESLING white (dry and sweet)
         SPARKLING WINES white

                                       WINES OF NOTE
         BACO NOIR red
         CATAWBA
         CATAWBA red and rosé
         CAYUGA white
         GEWÜRZTRAMINER white
         NIAGARA white
         RKATSITELI white
         SEYVAL BLANC white
         VIDAL white (dry and sweet)
         VIGNOLES white (dry and sweet)
                   THE GRAPES AND THE WINES

As noted, New York’s modern wine industry is based on familiar European (Vitis vinifera)
grapes—especially riesling, chardonnay, merlot, and cabernet franc (in that order). But as
a historical aside, it’s worth noting that New York’s vinous genetic scope was once quite
broad. Two generations ago, the state was also known for grapes that belonged to native
American species (Concord is an example; today these go into jelly and jam); dozens of
crosses of grapes within various American species (the grape catawba may be an
example); and numerous hybrids, such as seyval blanc, Vidal, vignoles, and Cayuga
(grapes created by breeding two different varieties that belong to different species). It
made for a fascinating world of flavor.
                      THE GRAPES OF NEW YORK STATE
Crosses and hybrids have been included in this list for reference purposes, although today they
constitute a small part of the modern industry.

                                              WHITES
CAYUGA: A French-American hybrid, Cayuga is often used in off-dry blends and for dessert wines.
CHARDONNAY: A major grape; the good to very good wines it becomes are leaner in style than
California chardonnays.
GEWÜRZTRAMINER: One of New York’s best-kept secrets, it can be turned into delicious wines
reminiscent of the gewürztraminers of Alsace.
NIAGARA: Foxy-tasting American cross that is often made into off-dry and dessert wines. It was first
bred in the 1860s by growers in Niagara County, New York.
RIESLING: A major grape that makes many dynamic, vibrant dry wines, as well as delicious off-dry and
dessert wines. Most of the best examples of riesling come from the Finger Lakes.
SEYVAL BLANC: A major French-American hybrid that is used on its own and in blends. Can make
good-tasting, dry wines.
VIDAL: A French-American hybrid; a source of dry wines and some exceptional icewines.
VIGNOLES: A somewhat rare French-American hybrid also known as Ravat 51; used for dry wines and
some tasty icewines.

                                                REDS
BACO NOIR: A French-American hybrid that makes simple, fruity red wines that aren’t particularly foxy.
CABERNET FRANC: A major grape that is often blended with merlot and cabernet sauvignon for
Bordeaux-style reds.
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Often blended with merlot to create Bordeaux-style reds. Only a modest
number of producers, notably on Long Island, use it as a single varietal.
CATAWBA: A cross or hybrid (the genetic history is unclear) that was very popular in the American
Northeast in the nineteenth century (back then, sparkling catawba was a specialty of the Finger Lakes). It
makes spicy, grapey, high-acid, light red and rosé wines.
CONCORD: A native grape belonging to the labrusca species, it was first grown from seed in
Massachusetts along the Concord River. It is the most widely planted grape in New York State, although
most of the production is used for grape juice and jelly, not wine. The remainder is used to make sweet
kosher wines and fortified wines.
MERLOT: A major grape, merlot can become sleek, berried wines that range from good to delicious,
especially those produced on Long Island.
PINOT NOIR: Generally used for New York’s numerous sparkling wines.
                     HYBRIDS AND CROSSES IN AMERICA
         From the mid-1800s to the mid-1900s, French scientists and horticulturists attempted to
         develop grape varieties that would taste similar to vinifera varieties, yet be more hardy
         and disease-resistant, like native American varieties. To come up with these new
         “super” grape varieties, hundreds, if not thousands, of hybrids of vinifera and native
         American varieties were bred. (Reminder: A hybrid is not the same as a cross. A hybrid
         is a grape variety created by breeding two grapes of different species—for example, by
         breeding a vinifera-species grape with a grape that belongs to an American species. A
         cross is a grape created by breeding two varieties from within the same species.)
             Many of the hybrids created by the French scientists (such as seyval blanc, vignoles,
         Vidal, and Baco noir) turned out to be fairly successful. They were indeed hardy in the
         vineyard, and their flavors, while not absolutely vinifera-like, also usually did not have
         the pungent grapey/animal fur character referred to as “foxy.” Some of these French-
         American hybrids were initially widely planted in France, although all hybrids were
         ultimately outlawed in that country. Such hybrids are, however, still grown today in New
         York State (and other northeastern U.S. states, as well as Canada).
            The history behind New York’s French-American hybrids revolves around an
         assumption that later proved to be false. For centuries, European grapes were wrongly
         presumed too fragile to withstand New York’s cold winters—especially in the Finger
         Lakes. But as the 1970s and 1980s progressed, more and more vintners took the risk
         of planting vinifera varieties, and consumers grew far more comfortable with New York
         wines based on them. The vinifera revolution was imminent.

   As of the early 2010s, about 60 percent of all the wine produced in New York State was
white, but red wines continue to show leaps in quality and sophistication. In particular, the
Bordeaux varieties cabernet franc and merlot are the hot varieties to watch—especially on
Long Island, which has the longest growing season in the state and a climate warm and
sunny enough to bring these red varieties to ripeness. Sleek and medium-bodied, these
reds are far more like Bordeaux wines than they are like California wines.
    With all due respect to the state’s increasingly solid reputation for fine red wines, New
York’s rieslings are among the most evanescent rieslings made in the United States (only a
few rieslings of the Pacific Northwest can compare). Utterly light in body but
concentrated in flavor, they have what the Germans—riesling specialists, after all—would
approvingly call precision and transparency (meaning they reflect the character of their
site). New York’s rieslings come in all styles: dry, off-dry, slightly sweet, late-harvest, and
icewines. The dry versions are wonderfully crisp, even austere; the off-dry rieslings,
harmonious and mellow; the sweet rieslings, luscious yet exquisitely balanced. There are
numerous New York rieslings that shouldn’t be missed, including those from Dr.
Konstantin Frank, Hermann J. Wiemer, and Sheldrake Point, to name three producers.
               CABERNET FRANC AND THE ISSUE OF COOL
 Some 500 years ago, cabernet franc and sauvignon blanc had a nice moment in nature and cabernet
 sauvignon was born. Like cabernet sauvignon, parent cabernet franc has always been associated with
 relatively cool or maritime climates—the Loire Valley and Bordeaux, in France, for example, and New
 York State, in the United States. The reason is completely practical.
     Cabernet franc vines bud late in the season (decreasing the chances that a catastrophic spring frost
 will kill the tender green growth and thus destroy the crop), and at the same time, cabernet franc grapes
 ripen early (avoiding potential fall rains and freezes that could decimate the harvest). Growers of cool-
 climate cabernet franc also argue that cool temperatures are what give the grape its distinct, sleek purity
 and nuanced flavors (including, often, violets, lavender, and a pleasing, resiny, green chaparral quality).
 But in a fascinating shift in the 2000s, cabernet franc plantings began increasing in numerous warm
 areas, such as California’s Napa and Sonoma valleys. Winemakers in these warmer areas say there’s a
 different side to the grape—a rich side that’s evocative of dark chocolate, blueberry, and black olive. So,
 while warm-climate cabernet franc is now cool, don’t forget, if you’re in France or New York, that cool-
 climate cabernet franc is still hot.

   Speaking of sweet wines, New York makes some of the best in the country—and not
only from riesling but also from French-American hybrids, such as Vidal and vignoles.
Sweet wines in the state come in two styles: late-harvest wines made with the help of
Botrytis cinerea, the noble rot that gives French Sauternes its character, and icewines. Like
the magnificent eisweins of Germany, Austria, and Canada, New York’s icewines are
made naturally from frozen grapes that have been left on the vines until well into winter.

VINIFERA VARIETIES SWEEP INTO THE STATE
Two prescient European immigrants are credited with ushering in a modern era for New
York State wines. Charles Fournier, a former Champagne master at the house of Veuve
Clicquot and later the head of New York’s Gold Seal Wine Company, and Dr. Konstantin
Frank, a Ukrainian-born professor with a PhD in viticulture and plant sciences, ultimately
changed the course of New York’s viticultural history by initiating, in the 1950s, what
would become a vinifera revolution. Frank, who spoke nine languages but no English,
came to New York City as an immigrant in 1951, at the age of fifty-four, and took the only
job he could find—washing dishes. Later, Charles Fournier hired him at Golden Seal and
allowed him to plant whatever European varieties he wished. Frank knew that vinifera
grew in Ukraine, where winter temperatures were well below those in the Finger Lakes.
By employing some careful and, at the time, sophisticated viticultural techniques, Frank
was successful at growing the species, and Fournier at making it into good wine. By the
early 1960s, Frank had established his own winery and was growing chardonnay, riesling,
rkatsiteli (are-cat-si-TELL-ee; a leading grape still grown in Georgia, Ukraine, and the
Republic of Moldova), and some sixty other European grapes theretofore considered
impossible to cultivate in New York State.
    This triumph inspired other leading-edge winemakers. By 1996, there were 4,000 acres
(1,600 hectares) of vinifera grapes in New York State, a 1,200 percent rise over the
acreage of 1980, and such wines as riesling, chardonnay, and merlot were breathing new
life into New York’s wine industry.




Dr. Konstantin Frank, a Ukrainian-born professor of viticulture and plant sciences, changed the course of winemaking
                   in New York State by successfully growing Vitis vinifera varieties in the 1950s.
                                             THE LAND

If you subtract the grapes grown for juice and jelly, New York has approximately 17,000
acres (6,890 hectares) of wine grapes, a small amount compared to California’s 543,000
acres (219,700 hectares).
    New York is, perhaps needless to say, very cool. Winter comes soon after Thanksgiving
and can last until April, well after vines in California are already budding. Long hours and
months of continuous sunshine are definitely not the norm, and achieving total ripeness
can be an iffy proposition. Of course, there is a blessing buried within this imperfect
situation. New York State, like other areas with cool climates, has the potential to make
some lovely, elegant wines.

                                                 L’CHAIM
    Wine is central to the religious rites of Jews, and especially to such profoundly important Jewish holidays
    as Passover. Historically, in the United States, most of the wine used in Jewish ceremonies was made in
    New York State, relatively near large urban centers of Jewish populations, including New York City.
    While today dry kosher wines are made all over the world (and many are very sophisticated), sweet kosher
    wine remains a New York tradition and is made from native American varieties, particularly Concord
    grapes. Today, the leading brands of sweet kosher wine are Manischewitz, Kedem, and Mogen David.




        The English naval explorer Henry Hudson (1565 to 1611), after whom the Hudson Valley is named.

   The state’s three major wine regions are fairly distant from one another, but share an
important common denominator. All are adjacent to large bodies of water, which help
moderate extremes of temperature, protecting the vines from severe cold snaps in spring
and fall and fanning them with refreshing breezes during hot summers.
   During the Ice Age, the glaciers that created New York’s myriad lakes also left behind
an amalgam of well-drained soils, from shale, schist, and limestone in the Finger Lakes to
silt and loam on Long Island. Taken together, the combination of a cool but water-
moderated climate, the variety of soil types, and individual sites that, geographically, can
deviate considerably, means that New York State wines are highly influenced by the
specific place where the grapes are grown.
   Below are short profiles of the three major wine-producing regions.
                         THE HUDSON RIVER VALLEY

The Hudson River, the first great passageway into the New World, was explored in 1609
by the Englishman Henry Hudson who, on behalf of the Dutch East India Company,
searched for a water route across North America to the Pacific. The deep, navigable river
quickly became so important to trade that the harbor at its mouth is credited with helping
New York City become one of the world’s most prominent cities.
   The vineyards of the Hudson River Valley, first planted in 1677 by French Huguenots,
are the oldest in New York State. They begin just 40 miles (64 kilometers) north of
Manhattan. Of the region’s thirty-nine wineries, most are small or medium size, and
production focuses on vinifera and some hybrid varieties. Perhaps the most forward-
thinking winery in the region is Millbrook, owned by John Dyson, the former state
commissioner of agriculture and markets and also the owner of the prominent Sonoma
pinot noir-oriented winery Williams-Selyem.




  Wish you were here! A postcard circa 1950 from the Finger Lakes, then (as now) a great rural vacation destination,
                                       especially for East Coast city dwellers.
                                  THE FINGER LAKES

Upstate New York’s Finger Lakes region has been the center of the New York wine
industry since the Civil War. Today, 118 wineries call this area home. The region fans out
from eleven finger-shaped lakes, the four major ones called Seneca, Cayuga,
Canandaigua, and Keuka, all Native American names. These narrow, deep lakes (some
deeper than the sea floor) were considered by the Iroquois to be formed by the hand of the
Great Spirit. Many wineries are within sight of the lakes, which are considered some of
the most beautiful in New York State.
   Originally planted with labrusca varieties and American crosses to make sweet wines,
the vineyards of the Finger Lakes were where the state’s French-American hybrids and
vinifera varieties got their start. Today, the region is abuzz with familiar activity. All types
of modern varieties are made here, from tasty chardonnays to sheer rieslings to lightly
spicy gewürztraminers. Not to be missed are the region’s excellent late-harvest and
icewines, some based on hybrids.

                        THE GRAPES OF (WELCH’S) WRATH
    New York produces more grape juice than any other state. That rich, purply, aromatic juice includes the
    famous brand Welch’s Concord grape juice, invented by Dr. Thomas Welch in 1869. Like most other grape
    juices, Welch’s is made from native Concord grapes grown along the banks of Lake Erie, a huge viticultural
    region spanning not only New York but also parts of Ohio and Pennsylvania. Were it not for Dr. Welch, an
    ardent Prohibitionist, the Lake Erie region might have developed as an important producer of wine grapes
    rather than juice grapes.

   Among the Finger Lakes’ most famous historic wineries are Dr. Konstantin Frank
Vinifera Wine Cellars, Hermann J. Wiemer, Wagner Vineyards, and the off-the-wall,
highly idiosyncratic Bully Hill Vineyards. The Finger Lakes region is also home to a
number of newer, exciting wineries, including Standing Stone Vineyards, Ravines, Knapp
Winery, Fox Run, and Sheldrake Point.
                                  LONG ISLAND

About 95 miles (150 kilometers) from New York City, the eastern end of Long Island is
New York State’s youngest wine region. The wine boom began here in earnest in the late
1970s and early 1980s, after John Wickham, a farmer in the small hamlet of Cutchogue,
successfully grew vinifera grapes in the mid-1960s. Although Wickham never made a
commercial wine, it was only a matter of a decade before someone did.
   In 1973, Louisa and Alex Hargrave founded Hargrave Vineyard in a former Cutchogue
potato field. Several years later, the Hargraves’ cabernets were generating waves of
surprise and excitement throughout the state. Other would-be Long Island vintners soon
followed. By the late 1990s, Long Island had twenty-four wineries, and today it boasts
sixty-three.
   Shaped like a lobster claw, Long Island begins close to the mainland of New York State
and then thrusts out into the sea on a northeast angle, roughly parallel to the Connecticut
coast. The end of the island splits into two slivers of land, called the North Fork and the
South Fork. The North Fork was historically known for its orchards, potato fields, and
small farms; the South Fork for its white-duned beaches and whaling ports. Today, the
South Fork is probably best known for the Hamptons, a string of chic, small villages
where well-to-do Manhattanites spend summer weekends.
    Although there are a sprinkling of wineries in the Hamptons, most of Long Island’s
vineyards are on the more protected and less populated North Fork. While it is surrounded
by water (Long Island Sound to the north, Peconic Bay to the south, and the Atlantic
Ocean to the east), the North Fork is not exposed broadside to the ocean, as is the South
Fork. Thus, the North Fork benefits from the moderating influences of the waters around
it, yet at the same time remains fairly well sheltered from severe saltwater storms and the
area’s not-infrequent hurricanes. As an additional boon, the North Fork of Long Island is
the sunniest part of New York State, an obvious advantage for ripening grapes.
   A viticultural threat both forks share, however, is birds. Long Island is on the Atlantic
flyway, a migratory route for numerous species of birds who can decimate a vineyard
within days. Many Long Island vineyards must be netted, at considerable expense to
vintners.
  Long Island’s Atlantic maritime climate led early vintners to look at another Atlantic
maritime climate for inspiration and guidance: Bordeaux. As a result, Long Island is now
commonly planted with the Bordeaux red varieties merlot and cabernet franc.
   Many Long Island wineries are among the most expensively and technically well
equipped in the state. The island’s proximity to Manhattan also means that vineyard land
here is the most expensive in New York—far more expensive than that in the Finger
Lakes, for example. Top Long Island wineries include Channing Daughters, Shinn, and
Paumanok.
           WHEN YOU VISIT… NEW YORK STATE
THE WINERIES of New York are set into some of the most charming, “small-town-
America” landscapes in the United States. Many are housed in converted barns or
colonial farmhouses, and the wine districts are full of old-fashioned inns, bed-and-
breakfasts, and country restaurants. Because of their proximity to waterways, many
wineries have panoramic views of stunning lakes or bays.
IF YOUR VISIT INCLUDES the Finger Lakes, be sure to experience the New York Wine
and Culinary Center in the town of Canandaigua, on Lake Canandaigua—an
educational tasting room, restaurant, and bar devoted to exploring the state’s many
wines and artisanal beers. And a word of travel advice: No bridges exist on the lakes,
so plan on long, scenic, rural drives around them to get from place to place.
                 The New York State Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                     CHANNING DAUGHTERS WINERY

                              MEDITAZIONE | SOUTH FORK OF LONG ISLAND
    38% muscat ottonel, 27% sauvignon blanc, 26% pinot blanc, 6% chardonnay, 2% pinot grigio, 1%
                                         malvasia bianca
Among the wines that Channing Daughters makes are two extraordinary and unusual wines—called Meditazione
and Envelope—both of which are reminiscent of the so-called “orange wines” made in Georgia, Slovenia, and the
Friuli-Venezia Giulia region of northern Italy. The Meditazione (of which just four barrels are made) is a beautifully
lush wine, exuberant with apricot and peach marmalade flavors and laced with notes of bitter orange zest. The
grapes for the wine were grown in Bridgehampton, on the South Fork, where the winery is located, as well as on
the North Fork, and the wine takes its vivid amber-orange color from eighteen months’ aging in Slavonian
hogsheads (a barrel slightly larger than a standard barrel). One of Long Island’s most avant-garde wineries,
Channing Daughters bases many of its wines on northern Italian grape varieties, many of which are fairly rare.
Cofounder Walter Channing named the estate for his four daughters.
                                          DR. KONSTANTIN FRANK

                                       DRY RIESLING | FINGER LAKES
                                                  100% riesling
The late Dr. Konstantin Frank—a Ukrainian viticulturist who came to the U.S. in 1951 and specialized in cold-
climate varieties—was one of the pioneers of viticulture in New York’s Finger Lakes region. Today, the winery’s
experience shows, especially with temperamental varieties like riesling. The Konstantin Frank rieslings have a
tactile sense of aliveness—a kind of kinetic edginess that makes them super refreshing. They are also delicate, and
laced with spiciness. But more than any other quality, they demonstrate fruity concentration without weightiness.
                                              HERMANN J. WIEMER

                                        DRY RIESLING | FINGER LAKES
                                                    100% riesling
Of all Finger Lakes rieslings, the one from Wiemer is perhaps most like the vibrant, dry rieslings from Germany.
Maybe this is no surprise, since the late Wiemer emigrated to New York from the Mosel village of Bernkastel and
planted his vineyards in 1976. There’s an exquisite sense of peach and tangerine fruit at the core of the wine,
framed by delicate floral notes and a slight, zesty lime bitterness. I can’t help imaging the clear, glacial waters of
the lakes themselves when drinking this.
                                                     FOX RUN

                       RIESLING 12 | HANGING DELTA VINEYARD | FINGER LAKES
                                                   100% riesling
From sites all along Seneca Lake, Fox Run makes a score of rieslings from dry to sweet and every permutation in
between. Riesling 12 is the winery’s name for their light-bodied off-dry riesling with a touch of gentle sweetness.
Hanging Delta Vineyard is a reference to the ancient glacial deltas (now planted with vines) that formed thousands
of years ago when a far larger lake drained to become Seneca Lake. This is an utterly delicate wine, and one that
captures riesling’s evanescent sense of beauty. As noted, it’s also a bit sweet, but not in an ultrarich, viscous, or
candied way. Rather, you have the sense that you’ve drunk the lightest essence of apricots, peaches, and
strawberries—and that you could drink it all day long.




                                                   MILLBROOK

                      TOCAI FRIULANO | LOLLIPOP HILL | HUDSON RIVER VALLEY
                                                   100% Friulano
Millbrook’s Friulano (at the time of this writing, the winery still used the old name for the grape, tocai Friulano)
totally captures the essence of the delicious Friulanos from the northern Italian province Friuli-Venezia Giulia. It’s
light, zesty, and spicy, and has just the merest spin of something green, like dried sage or the way hedges smell in
spring. Yet, like all good Friulanos, it also has a beautiful, creamy middle that makes the wine irresistible.
Millbrook is owned by David Bova and his brother-in-law, John Dyson, a former agricultural commissioner of New
York.
                                                       REDS




                                                     PAUMANOK

                CABERNET FRANC | GRAND VINTAGE | NORTH FORK OF LONG ISLAND
                                                100% cabernet franc
Paumanok makes some of the top reds on Long Island. The wines are beautiful expressions of their grape varieties,
and are always juicy and dead-on delicious. My favorite is the winery’s cabernet franc—a woodsy, violety, wild-
berried wine that exudes a lip-smacking “red” quality—almost like grenadine. The wine couldn’t be easier to drink.
Imagine a farmers’ market stand of Long Island berries. Yet there’s structure and firmness here, too. A serious,
sophisticated Hampton party red.




                                                   SHINN ESTATE

                NINE BARRELS | MERLOT | RESERVE | NORTH FORK OF LONG ISLAND
                          96% merlot, with small amounts of malbec and petite verdot
From the husband-and-wife team of David Page and Barbara Shinn (former New York City restaurateurs) comes
Nine Barrels—a merlot that’s neither heavy nor lean, but beautifully mid-prance between the two (not unlike a Cru
Bourgeois Bordeaux). The fascinating combination of raspberry, pomegranate, and rhubarb pie aromas and flavors
has a cool purity that’s true to Long Island’s relatively cool climate. The savory whoosh of spice, black tea, and
mineral flavors at the end is unusual for merlot, and deliciously distinctive. Needless to say, just nine barrels of this
wine (about 225 cases) are made each year.

                                               SWEET WINES
                                              SHELDRAKE POINT

                                           ICEWINE | FINGER LAKES
                                                   100% riesling
Upstate New York is famous for its icewines, dessert wines made by allowing the grapes to remain on the vine well
into the winter. When the frozen grapes are finally picked, the juice that slowly oozes from them is completely
luscious. Sheldrake Point’s stunning icewine engulfs your senses with slow-motion tidal waves of dense apricot
flavor. Although massively concentrated and quite sweet (28.3 percent residual sugar—or 283 grams of sugar per
liter), the wine soars on the palate with a Zen-like lightness of being. A totally sensual experience.




                                               STANDING STONE

                                         RIESLING ICE | FINGER LAKES
                                                   100% riesling
Sweet wines can be bold and intense or ethereally exquisite and delicate. Standing Stone’s the latter. With its
beautifully pensive flavors (apricots, peaches, lemon curd), this is the “quiet music” of sweet wine. Even the
sweetness itself seems to come at you in whispers. And the achingly long finish is just the way a great dinner
should end. Technically speaking, Riesling Ice is not a traditional icewine, since the grapes were not fully frozen on
the vine (the grapes were picked after they began to freeze, but were then placed in very cold storage until they
were frozen solid). The grapes come from the remarkable, old Gold Seal Vineyard, planted with riesling in 1974.
TEXAS

Some wine drinkers may find it surprising that good wine—or any wine at all, for that
matter—can be eked out of dusty lands that even the cowboys found trying. Perhaps more
surprising is the idea that Texas may have been one of the earliest places in the United
States to produce wine. Historians theorize that Franciscan priests planted vineyards
possibly as early as 1660, at missions in what is now far west Texas. Today, winemaking
continues in the Lone Star State, and it’s definitely not cowboy juice.
   Texas is the largest of the forty-eight contiguous states. In landmass, it is bigger than
France, although all of the vineyard acreage in the state, some 3,500 acres (1,400
hectares), could easily fit into the confines of the small French appellation of Sancerre.
There are three broad grape-growing areas—the Texas Hill Country, the High Plains, and
the vast Trans-Pecos region (more on all to follow). Within each region, wineries are not
grouped closely together but scattered across hundreds of miles/kilometers of differing
mesoclimates and terrains. Neighboring wineries are often more than an hour’s drive
apart.
    As was true in California, the first grapes planted in Texas were mission grapes, a
Spanish variety (known in Spain as listán prieto) that was the same as Chile’s país grape,
and that was one of the parents of Argentina’s criolla grape. However serviceable mission
wine might have been, it was only that—serviceable. By the nineteenth century, as new
immigrants from Germany, Italy, and France came to Texas, they brought more European
grape varieties. Generally, the vines succumbed to the severities of the climate and
disease. Texas’s immigrant winemakers were undeterred. When their new European vines
failed, they made wine from native Texas grapes, including one called, appropriately
enough, mustang.
Fall Creek Vineyards in the Texas Hill Country near Austin. In the mid 1970s, owners Ed and Susan Auler were among
                   the first in Texas to take a serious approach to grape growing and winemaking.

   While there were at least sixteen commercial wineries operating in Texas prior to
Prohibition, after it, only Val Verde Winery, near the border city of Del Rio, on the Rio
Grande, remained. Almost four decades passed. Then, in the 1970s, the modern wine
boom boomed—and it did so in a peculiarly Texan way.

                                 THE QUICK SIP ON TEXAS
          TEXAS IS ONE OF THE OLDEST wine regions in the United States.
          ALTHOUGH CABERNET SAUVIGNON and chardonnay are the most widely planted
          grapes in the state, dozens of varieties—from tempranillo and syrah to viognier and
          roussanne—are now grown, as Texans continue their search to determine which
          grapes will excel.
          TEXAS’S NEARLY 250 WINERIES are scattered across thousands of miles, with
          differing mesoclimates.

   In 1973, Ed Auler, a Texas cattle rancher and lawyer, went to France with his wife,
Susan, to further his knowledge of cattle breeds. A few days of looking at cattle
metamorphosed into several weeks of looking at vineyards and tasting wine. When the
Aulers stood outside Clos de Vougeot, one of Burgundy’s most famous vineyards, they
noticed how much the topography and the limestone soil reminded them of their ranch in
the Texas Hill Country. The Aulers thought the Texas thought: We can do that. Fall Creek
Vineyards was born ten years later.
   Meanwhile, out on the High Plains, in Lubbock, other vineyards were being planted. In
1974, after noticing how exuberantly the grape trellis over his patio was growing, Texas
Tech professor Bob Reed teamed up with another professor, Clinton McPherson, and the
two scientists planted one hundred varieties intended merely as a fun science project for
their students. Within a few years, the project had become the highly successful Llano
Estacado Winery, currently the largest winery in the state.
                                         A TEXAS HERO
 Texas horticulturist T. V. Munson (1843–1913) played a central role in saving the vineyards of Europe
 from phylloxera devastation in the nineteenth century. In 1876, Munson began studying grapes, traveling
 from his home north of Dallas, in Denison, some 75,000 miles (120,700 kilometers) throughout the
 United States and Mexico (often on horseback), collecting native American grape varieties as he went.
 Using these as parents, Munson developed more than three hundred disease-resistant varieties of
 grapes. Based on his research, he wrote the classic text Foundation of American Grape Culture in 1909.
   When phylloxera struck the vineyards of Europe, Munson was among those who shipped supplies of
 native rootstocks to European vintners. By grafting their vines onto the Texas-grown rootstocks,
 Europeans were ultimately able to salvage what remained of their vineyards. For his work, Munson was
 awarded the French Legion of Honor Cross of Mérite Agricole in 1888.


   Segue to 1976. The University of Texas began to ponder the future of its 2.1 million
acres (849,800 hectares) of land scattered across nineteen counties in the West Texas
desert. Early in 1921, the Santa Rita oil well struck lucky, helping the university to
become one of the richest in the world. But oil was a limited resource. The university’s
manager of lands and property, Billy Carr, proposed a mind-blowing idea: plant vineyards.
In 1981, the first vines belonging to what would later become Ste. Genevieve Winery
(named after a fifth-century nun who is the patron saint of Paris) were planted beside a
giant mesa in the middle of the West Texas desert. By 1992, the winery was producing
more than 100,000 cases of wine each year. And so the stories went. Texans thinking
about cattle, about land, about oil, about agricultural innovation found their way to wine
grapes. The movement had begun.

                                           SPAIN’S GIFT
    No alcoholic beverage made from grapes appears to have been produced in the Americas before the
    arrival of the Spanish conquistadores in the sixteenth century, according to Tim Unwin in Wine and the
    Vine: An Historical Geography of Viticulture and the Wine Trade. Instead, the indigenous peoples of
    Mesoamerica made such alcoholic drinks as pulque, the forerunner of mescal, from the maguey or agave
    plant; tesgüino, from the sprouted kernels of maize; and balche, from mead, flavored with the leaves of
    the Lonchocarpus, a tropical tree or climbing shrub with colorful flowers. What makes this all the more
    fascinating is that numerous native species of the grape genus Vitis were to be found in the Americas,
    including in the Rio Grande Valley of Texas.
                                 THE GRAPES OF TEXAS
                                               WHITES
BLANC DU BOIS: A hybrid developed at the University of Florida in 1968 and now grown in Florida,
Texas, and the Gulf States because of its tolerance of humidity and resistance to Pierce’s disease. It
makes fresh, clean, fruity wines.
CHARDONNAY: A major white grape; the styles and quality of the wines made from it are variable and in
flux.
CHENIN BLANC: A minor grape that is often made into good off-dry wines as a counterpoint to the
region’s chile-rich cuisine.
MUSCAT CANELLI: A minor grape, the same as muscat blanc à petits grains. It is made into very good
off-dry wines.
SAUVIGNON BLANC: A major grape that can be the source of good, tasty, often peachy-herbal-flavored
wines.
VIOGNIER: Plantings are small but growing. Many viticulturists believe Texas’s future lies in Rhône
varieties.

                                                 REDS
CABERNET FRANC: A modest amount is grown, often used for blending, but it is sometimes made into
very good wine on its own.
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: A leading red grape; makes good wines.
LENOIR: An American-species grape, also known as “black Spanish” because of its incredibly dark
color. Native to Texas, it is appreciated for its resistance to Pierce’s disease and is usually used in
blends.
MALBEC: A minor grape currently, but plantings are increasing significantly and the wines show
promise.
MERLOT: A significant amount is grown, but it’s mostly blended into cabernet sauvignon-based wines.
SANGIOVESE: A minor grape, but plantings are increasing a bit as vintners experiment with Italian
varieties.
SYRAH: An important grape; increasingly planted, with growing success.
TEMPRANILLO: Plantings are small but growing. Expectations are high for the eventual success of this
variety in Texas.
                         THE LAND AND THE GRAPES

There may be a Texas spirit, a Texas accent, a Texas cuisine, a Texas way of considering
things, maybe even a Texas ego—but there is not a Texas land. Texas covers more than
267,000 square miles (691,500 square kilometers). Geologically and climatically, the state
is enormously varied.
    The three broad grape-growing regions—Texas Hill Country, in the center of the state;
High Plains, on the Texas Panhandle; and Trans-Pecos, a large winegrowing area in the
southwest bordering Mexico—all encompass numerous smaller AVAs. Texas Hill Country
is a concatenation of rolling hills and color. The white limestone and pink granite soil
stares out from the rough rock faces it clings to. In the spring, these hills are covered with
scratchy olive-green mesquite and awash in bluebonnets and wagon-red wildflowers
called Indian paintbrushes. By comparison, the High Plains are precisely that: majestic,
flat plains some 3,600 feet (1,100 meters) above sea level, carpeted with wild grasses as
far as the eye can see. The Trans-Pecos, in the West Texas desert, is yet again different,
full of awe-inspiring, isolated mountainscapes; vast, barren red mesas; canyons; and,
occasionally, fertile river valleys. Within the Trans-Pecos region, the Escondido Valley
viticultural area is made up of limestone-laced hills and mountains full of marine
sedimentary rock.




 A country highway leads through a field of Texas bluebonnets in the Texas Hill Country. The dazzling wildflowers of
 central Texas were seeded several decades ago as a gift from Lady Bird Johnson, wife of 36th U.S. president Lyndon
                                                      Johnson.
                  THE MOST IMPORTANT TEXAS WINES
                                   LEADING WINES
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white

                                    WINES OF NOTE
         BLANC DU BOIS white
         CHENIN BLANC white
         MUSCAT white
         SYRAH red
         TEMPRANILLO red
         VIOGNIER white

    What is viticulturally critical in each of these regions are the well-drained soils, the
high altitude of the best vineyards, and the fact that hot days usually don’t end in equally
hot nights. Without some temperature drop at night, Texas would not be able to produce
good wine. Still, Texas is a comparatively warm place for grape-growing. The vines often
wake up from their winter dormancy early in the year, and are sometimes ready to be
harvested by the end of July—a full two to three months before the harvest in California
and most European wine regions. As a result of this shortish, immediately warm growing
season, grapes in Texas sometimes lack sufficient hang time at cooler temperatures. This,
in turn, may be why so many Texas wines are simple and good—but not complex. (A long
hang time and a progressive but slow pace en route to ripeness are thought to be some of
the factors behind complexity in wine.)
                                 THE FOODS OF TEXAS

For most of its history, Texas was better known for its cowboy boots than for its culinary
bounty. That changed radically in the 1980s when, just as the modern wine industry was
forming, a handful of dynamic young chefs began to piece together a maverick new style
of cooking deemed Southwestern cuisine. Although it had no tidy parameters,
Southwestern cuisine did have deep historical roots. They begin with the native Hopi and
Pueblo Indians, who roasted corn to bring out its sweetness, used chiles to heighten flavor,
grilled fish over hot-burning Texas woods, and smoked game.




Aging wine at Caprock Winery, on the High Plains of the Texas Panhandle near the town of Lubbock. Vineyards here are
                        planted on a vast plateau 3,600 feet (1,000 meters) above sea level.

    Cowboys, too, left their culinary mark. With only a sack of pinto beans, a bucket of
lard, a dozen eggs, chiles, garlic, a sack of masa harina (ground corn), a sack of flour, and
coffee as provisions, cowboys set off to uninhabited ranch lands for weeks at a time. They
hunted and grilled wild turkey, quail, and venison and made rough homemade biscuits or
camp bread cooked over coals in black cast-iron pots. Biscuits, in fact, were a cowboy’s
silverware.
    Although both are Texas specialties, grilling is not the same as barbecuing. Grilled food
is cooked quickly over an open flame. The American word barbecue comes from
barbacoa, the word Spanish explorers used to describe meats cooked extremely slowly in
a pit, so that the meat was cooked by smoke as much as by flame, if not more so. In the
end, the meat would be so tender and succulent it would fall off the bone. Pit barbecue
restaurants are still found all over the state.
  Texas shares 1,240 miles (2,000 kilometers) of border with Mexico. From the
Mexicans, Texans learned how to cook with avocados, tomatoes, vanilla, and chocolate.
Texas salsas (rough, uncooked sauces made from diced tomatoes, other vegetables,
tropical fruits, and spices) are Mexican-inspired, as are flan desserts. Mexican home cooks
taught Texans how to make food refreshing by using lime juice in marinades and as a
seasoning. (Today, many Texans still drink beer as Mexicans do, with fresh lime squeezed
in.) Mexican tortillas—thin, unleavened corn or flour disks—are the unofficial Texas
bread.
   The greatest commingling of Mexican and Texan cooking has been the development of
Tex-Mex cuisine. Gutsy, homey, and inexpensive, Tex-Mex was created by Mexican
Americans living in Texas and working with limited ingredients and a limited budget. The
most famous Tex-Mex dishes (tacos, burritos, chiles rellenos, fajitas) are all based on
tortillas, usually wrapped around some combination of beans, melted cheese, and ground
or sliced beef or pork, all spiked up with a fieryhot dipping sauce. Texans say that if your
forehead does not break out in beads of sweat, you are in the wrong Tex-Mex restaurant.




 Chicken-fried steak with cream gravy. Not chicken; not steak exactly, and no cream. But a Texas specialty nonetheless
                                       and great with a Texas sauvignon blanc.

   Texas, however, is as much the South as it is the West. Chicken-fried steak with cream
gravy—a Southern dish—could almost be called the official Texas state dish. The name
makes little sense, for the dish has nothing to do with chicken, and there is no cream in the
gravy. To make it, an inexpensive cut of beef is seasoned with black pepper, flattened into
a thin patty, coated in a flour, milk, and egg batter, and then deep-fried until it is crunchy.
Over it, Texans pour the cream gravy, a dense, gray-brown sauce made by mixing flour
with nutmeg, black pepper, and a little milk and then cooking the mixture until it is thick
and lumpy. If anything begs for a glass of Texas cabernet, it’s chicken-fried steak.
                    WHEN YOU VISIT… TEXAS
THERE’S SOMETHING indescribably charming about watching wine-makers wearing
cowboy boots as they explain the intricacies of their “whyyyyyne…” (a multisyllabic
word in the Lone Star State). Many Texas wineries welcome visitors, although it’s a
good idea to look up specific directions, since most wineries are deep in the
countryside. It’s often the owners themselves who will take you around.
                            The Texas Wines to Know
                                                  WHITES




                                                 PEDERNALES

                                       VIOGNIER | RESERVE | TEXAS
                                                 100% viognier
Viognier, the great aromatic white grape of France’s minuscule Condrieu region, in the northern Rhône Valley,
would seem one of the least likely candidates for vinous residency in Texas. But viognier made in the Lone Star
State can be surprisingly good, and Pedernales is one of my favorites. With its deep floral/honeysuckle aromas and
fresh apricot and vanilla flavors, this viognier is spot-on in terms of personality, but a steal in terms of price.
Pedernales was founded in 2008 by the fifth, sixth, and seventh Texas generations of the Kuhlken family (just about
everybody in the family works at the winery).
                                        HAAK VINEYARDS & WINERY

                                            BLANC DU BOIS | TEXAS
                                                100% blanc du bois
No doubt about it—a winery located on the way to Galveston from Houston deserves to show up as the subject of a
country western song. Especially Haak Vineyards—whose owner made the first blanc du bois in Texas back in the
early 1980s. This wine is fruity and fresh—the kind of tasty, crisp white you might imagine would be perfect on a
hot southern Texas night. Indeed, Texas vintners are pretty keen on this little grape—a complex hybrid developed in
1968 at the University of Florida. Blanc du bois is now grown all over the Gulf States, thanks to its amazing ability
to tolerate humidity, pests, and fatal vine diseases like Pierce’s disease.




                                               LLANO ESTACADO

                                                 VIVIANA | TEXAS
      An ever-changing blend of gewürztraminer, muscat canelli, viognier, riesling, and chardonnay
The winery’s name, Llano Estacado, means “staked plains,” which is what the area was called by Francisco
Coronado, the early explorer who marked his way across the High Plains searching for the legendary cities of gold.
Startling as the thought of northern European aromatic varieties planted in Texas may be, Llano Estacado’s Viviana
is a lively, fresh, thirst-slaking quaff that’s beautifully aromatic and fruity. It’s got some great crispness (perhaps
from the riesling) and a wonderful, marmalade-like hint of bitterness (that’s gewürztraminer talking).
                                                     REDS




                                                 RED CABOOSE

                         CABERNET FRANC-TEMPRANILLO | TEXAS HIGH PLAINS
                                     70% cabernet franc, 30% tempranillo
Texans boast that they can cook a mean steak, and this cabernet franc-tempranillo blend would be just the right
partner. With the very first sip, you know you’re in for something dramatic and flavorful. Slightly rugged in an
attractive way, this blend has terrific structure and appealing aromas and flavors reminiscent of woodsmoke,
graphite, tobacco, and roasted coffee beans. Indeed, this wine recently won “Class Champion” at the Houston
Livestock Show and Rodeo (eat your heart out, Château Margaux). Founded in 2003, Red Caboose is the effort of
father-son team Gary and Evan McKibben. Gary, an architect, specializes in sustainable structures, and thus Red
Caboose uses geothermal power for heating, cooling, refrigeration, and all other electricity, and the winery is built
to harvest rainwater (1 inch of rainfall = 16,000 gallons; 2.54 centimeters = 606 hectoliters), which is used to
irrigate the vineyards. The winery also makes a fun syrah/tempranillo/cabernet sauvignon blend called Range Rider.
                                                 FALL CREEK

                             SALT LICK VINEYARD | TEMPRANILLO | TEXAS
                                               100% tempranillo
Fall Creek, one of the early pioneers of the modern Texas wine industry, made this rugged tempranillo from the
vineyards at The Salt Lick—a famous down-home barbecue joint in Driftwood, Texas (don’t plan on leavin’ after
the pork ribs without takin’ a whole homemade pecan pie home, y’all). Back to the wine, this is tempranillo
reminiscent of the center of Spain—juicy yet edgy, with a good grip of bitterness that makes you want meat charred
on the grill.

                                             SWEET WINE
                                                     CAP ROCK

                                  ORANGE MUSCAT | TEXAS HIGH PLAINS
                                               100% orange muscat
Muscat may well be the most beloved variety of grape. Indeed, the intense fruitiness of muscat wine is like the
liquid version of a tropical fruit salad. And this one, from Cap Rock, is true to the orange in its name, for the wine
also bursts with tangerine, kumquat, and mandarin flavors. This is a wine to be iced down cold and served all by
itself on a hot weekend afternoon. (Orange muscat is a cross of muscat blanc à petits grains and chasselas.)
 Barboursville Vineyards, a plantation, vineyard, and mansion founded in 1821 by James Barbour, former governor of
Virginia and secretary of war (1825–1828) under President John Quincy Adams. The estate was purchased and restored
                                   in 1976 by the Italian winemaking family Zonin.
VIRGINIA

Among the first wines produced in America were those made around 1607 by Jamestown
colonists, from wild, musky-tasting scuppernong grapes. The wines were so poor—even
by colonial standards—that in 1619 the Virginia Company sent French vine cuttings and
eight French winemakers to Jamestown to help establish proper vineyards and make
decent wine. That same year, by legislative act, each colonist was required to plant at least
ten grapevines. French help proved futile. The maiden vineyards soon died from fungal
diseases and pests.

                               THE QUICK SIP ON VIRGINIA
          ATTEMPTS TO MAKE WINE in Virginia began in 1607—the earliest record of wine
          production in the United States.
          DISEASES, PESTS, and difficult weather destroyed most of the early vineyards,
          including those planted by third U.S. president, Thomas Jefferson.
          THE MODERN ERA of Virginia wine-making started in the late 1970s with the planting
          of chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, and other grapes.




 The old barn at Early Mountain Vineyards, along the Monticello Wine Trail in the pastoral Blue Ridge Mountains of
 Virginia. The mostly small family wineries here continue to be inspired by Thomas Jefferson’s vision of an American
                                                    wine culture.

   Remarkably, the early Virginians were undeterred. For almost two centuries they
continued to plant vines, and the vines, for their part, continued to perish. By President
Thomas Jefferson’s time, the prospects for a Virginia wine industry appeared nonexistent.
Not that this stopped Jefferson (see box, page 793); he planted his Monticello vineyard in
1807. Alas, the vines eventually died because of diseases and pests.
   Then, in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the picture changed radically.
The devastation wrought by severely cold winters, plus vine diseases and phylloxera,
caused plant breeders to develop (and import) a number of new crosses and hybrid grapes
(for information about crosses and hybrids, see page 771). These crosses and hybrids
became quite successful, even though, compared to European wines, some were still an
acquired taste because of their grapey/animal fur character, known as “foxy.” As time
went on, however, several hybrids—including Vidal, Maréchal Foch, and chambourcin—
were singled out as higher in quality, thanks to their relative lack of foxiness. Each is still
grown (in small quantities) in Virginia today.
                           AMERICA’S FIRST WINE EXPERT
 Thomas Jefferson, third president of the United States and author of the Declaration of Independence,
 was an accomplished architect, scientist, musician, philosopher, scholar, and farmer in addition to being
 a politician. He was also America’s first wine expert.
    Born in Albemarle County, Virginia, on April 13, 1743, Jefferson was appointed ambassador to France
 at the age of forty-one, and moved to Paris. There he became deeply impressed by the French—
 especially their love of food and wine. Subsequently, he arranged for his slave James Hemings to take
 lessons from a French chef, promising Hemings his freedom if he would teach French cooking to the
 other slaves at Monticello.
    During his time in Europe, Jefferson became profoundly curious about viticulture. In 1787 and 1788,
 he toured the wine regions of France, Germany, and northern Italy, visiting the top producers and taking
 detailed notes in hopes of growing European (vinifera) grapes and making wine at Monticello. When he
 returned in 1789, wines from the most prestigious vineyards of Europe were included in his eighty-six
 packing cases. He also came back zealously enthusiastic, convinced that, in moderation, wine was an
 integral part of healthful living. Alas, Jefferson’s own attempts at establishing a vineyard in Virginia and
 making wine repeatedly failed.
   Consuming great wine was, luckily, easier than producing it. Not surprisingly, the White House cellar
 was amply stocked—especially with French wines—during the Jefferson presidency. Indeed, Jefferson
 personally spent many thousands of dollars on wine—a feat in and of itself, given what wine cost in
 1800. But Jefferson had an impact on the White House cellar well before and long after his terms. From
 Washington’s presidency through Monroe’s, Jefferson positioned himself as the unofficial presidential
 wine adviser, always ready with recommendations, even when none were requested.
    No president since Jefferson has ever taken such a profound interest in wine and wine’s beneficial
 role in society. The White House cellar remains, however, well stocked—today, mostly with American
 wines.

   But the real birth of the state’s modern wine industry came in the 1980s, with the
widespread planting of vinifera grapes such as chardonnay and cabernet franc. A new
period of optimism ensued. In 1979, there had been just 286 acres (116 hectares) of
vineyards and six wineries in Virginia. By 2011, there were 2,600 acres (1,052 hectares)
and 250 wineries. And, helpfully, some of the modern families who now own those
wineries have a lot of experience with new ventures. Real estate magnate Donald Trump
and AOL founder Steve Case, for example, both own wineries in Virginia.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

The state’s wineries are scattered over seven appellations, from Shenandoah Valley, in the
northwest, between the Allegheny and Blue Ridge Mountains; to Monticello (named after
the nearby home of Thomas Jefferson); to Northern Neck (George Washington’s
birthplace); North Fork of Roanoke; Rocky Knob; and the Eastern Shore.
                                 VIRGINIA COUNTRY HAM
 Arguably the quintessential Southern food, country ham has been produced in Virginia and its
 neighboring states from the earliest Colonial times. As the number of artisanal producers has declined,
 however, production of true country ham has diminished sharply.
    Unlike the baked ham often eaten at Easter, Virginia country ham has a very dramatic, sweet, meaty
 flavor and can be quite salty. Like Italian prosciutto, it’s meant to be sliced paper thin.
    The best country hams—such as those produced near the town of Smithfield—come from peanut-fed
 hogs. The hams are dry-cured with sugar and seasonings, then smoked over hickory wood and aged
 from three months to up to one year. The longer the aging, the saltier the meat.
   Salty foods often work best with either high-acid wines or sweet wines. Or, if you’re up for an
 adventure, try a juicy, fruity red that’s uniquely Virginian: Norton.
   Here are three top Virginia ham producers: Smithfield Packing Co., Gwaltney of Smithfield, and S.
 Wallace Edwards & Sons.

   Eastern Virginia’s vineyards tend to be planted mostly in clay and loam soils, while
soils in the western part of the state are more granite based. Despite these soil differences,
and although the vineyards are scattered across the entire state, all of them share a
dramatic continental climate. Winters can be so bitingly cold that the trunks of the vines
can freeze and split open. Springtime frosts can kill new buds. In summer, excessive heat
can make the grapes ripen too quickly, which detracts from the elegance of the final wine.
Humidity during the growing season can lead to rot, mildew, and disease. And as if all of
this wasn’t enough, hurricane season overlaps with the harvest, posing a threat of
torrential rains. In Virginia, winemakers and viticulturists need to be extremely well
skilled, and it’s critical to plant vineyards only in sites where threats and problems are
minimized.
                     THE MOST IMPORTANT VIRGINIA WINES
                                              LEADING WINES
           CABERNET FRANC red
           CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
           CHARDONNAY white
           MERLOT red
           VIDAL BLANC white
           VIOGNIER white

                                              WINES OF NOTE
           CHAMBOURCIN red
           NORTON red
           PETIT VERDOT red




  Monticello, the Virginia estate of Thomas Jefferson, third President of the United States. Had Jefferson’s hopes come
true, the United States would have had a thriving wine industry by the turn of the 19th century, for Jefferson considered
                                    wine the most healthful and civilized of beverages.
                              THE GRAPES OF VIRGINIA
                                              WHITES
CHARDONNAY: A widely planted grape; virtually every winery makes a chardonnay.
VIDAL BLANC: An important French-American hybrid that can make very good wines.
VIOGNIER: The second-leading white grape in the state; its quality can be very good.

                                                REDS
CABERNET FRANC: An important grape that shows promise. It makes lean reds that are smoky and
slightly spicy.
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Generally less successful than cabernet franc; the wines from cabernet
sauvignon vary in quality.
CHAMBOURCIN: An important hybrid with very good success in Virginia. It makes lean reds.
MERLOT: An important grape; most examples are fairly light and lean.
NORTON: A hybrid that makes simple, fruity wines with a lot of berry flavors. Although only a small
amount is planted, the quality can be high.
PETIT VERDOT: An up-and-coming grape that makes lean, slightly spicy reds, sometimes with a lot of
tannin.



                           WHEN YOU VISIT… VIRGINIA
        JUST OVER 60 PERCENT of Virginia wine is sold in-state, and much of that is sold
        directly from the wineries themselves. As a result, even the tiniest of Virginia wineries
        welcomes (with considerable Southern hospitality) visitors and conducts tours and
        tastings.
        VIRGINIA WINE COUNTRY is among the most beautiful in the United States, and
        many wineries have pick-your-own apple orchards, picnic areas, wine festivals, and
        even, should you be spontaneously swept away, wedding facilities.
                           The Virginia Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                                MICHAEL SHAPS

                                             TANNAT | MONTICELLO
                                                    100% tannat
It’s hard to know if tannat has a future in Virginia (or in the U.S.), but this wine gives a hopeful glimpse of what
might be possible. Bold and packed with tar and dark chocolate flavors, it’s a wine that needs a shivery night and
snow on the ground. Indeed, the savory/salty/bitter flavors and sleek but mouthfilling texture are just waiting for a
roast leg of lamb to be taken from the oven. Michael Shaps, a veteran of the Virginia wine scene, studied in
Burgundy before making wine for several Virginia wineries, including, as of 2007, his own.
                                            CHATEAU MORRISETTE

                                           VIOGNIER | MONTICELLO
                                                   100% viognier
Chateau Morrisette, founded in the Blue Ridge Mountains in 1978, is owned by the Morrisette family, who are
clearly dog lovers (the corks are branded “woof woof,” the wine’s back label is in the shape of a dog bone; the
website is thedogs.com; and many of their wines are named after dogs: Black Dog, Frosty Dog, and Our Dog Blue).
But canines aside, viognier is one of the family’s strong suits. It’s full of floral aromas (though thankfully it’s not
excessively perfumey) and tastes of dried apricot, quince, and citrus. Viognier fans, this is for you.

                                                      REDS
                                                     CHRYSALIS

                                 NORTON | LOCKSLEY RESERVE | VIRGINIA
                                                     100% Norton
Made from the American hybrid called Norton, this juicy, light-bodied wine has a strawberry preserve quality, plus
the hint of a good, bitter, Campari-like edge. Chill it just a bit (as if it were Beaujolais) and serve with some good
Virginia country ham. Chrysalis has the largest plantings of Norton grapes in the world.




                                         BARBOURSVILLE VINEYARDS

                                         CABERNET FRANC | RESERVE
                                   95% cabernet franc, 5% cabernet sauvignon
Barboursville, a historic Virginia landmark located between Monticello and Montpelier, boasts the ruins of the
elegant 1814 brick house that Thomas Jefferson designed for his friend, the governor of Virginia and U.S. Senator
James Barbour. The winery was founded in 1976 by Gianni Zonin, heir to one of the largest wine companies in
Italy, and grows more than a dozen varieties of grapes. In particular, the winery’s cabernet franc shows fine
character and the potential for this variety in Virginia. With a distinct cedar/earth/cassis-like aroma and flavor, plus
a significant structure, the wine is reminiscent of an easy-drinking but sophisticated Cru Bourgeois Bordeaux.
                                                     LINDEN

                                         HARDSCRABBLE | VIRGINIA
   Approximately 70% cabernet sauvignon, 15% cabernet franc, and small amounts of petit verdot and
                                             merlot
Linden, a small winery in the Blue Ridge Mountains, about an hour’s drive west of Washington, D.C., has made
cabernet-based wines since 1987, and their experience shows. Hardscrabble (named for a difficult plot of rocky,
arid land) is the real deal—a Bordeaux-style wine with a solid core of licoricey/cocoa-y fruit, and a wonderful
barklike character reminiscent of sophisticated bitters.




                                                  FLYING FOX

                                        PETIT VERDOT | MONTICELLO
                                  Approximately 80% petit verdot, with merlot
This inky wine is a surprise for Virginia, and perhaps an indication of good things to come from this variety. The
wine is classic petit verdot—black in color, packed with rich red currant flavors, smoky, chocolaty, and very
structured. Flying Fox, a small family winery, takes its name from the fox-topped weathervane on the property.
                                                  KING FAMILY

                                           MERITAGE | MONTICELLO
                  Approximately 50% merlot, plus petit verdot, cabernet franc, and malbec
The King family make very good Bordeaux-style wines from their estate in Monticello (the term meritage refers to
wines made from a blend of varieties historically grown in Bordeaux). These are medium-bodied, easy-drinking
wines that have a nice sleekness to them and terrific structure. Their sophisticated flavors and aromas lean toward
dark chocolate, licorice, and tar. Like many Virginia wineries, this one is beautiful and has a deep sense of Southern
hospitality. Every Sunday in summer, polo matches are held at the winery’s polo field.
Casa Rondena Winery in the Rio Grande Valley, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
OTHER IMPORTANT
WINE REGIONS

ARIZONA | MISSOURI | NEW MEXICO | PENNSYLVANIA | IDAHO | MICHIGAN
                     | COLORADO | NEW JERSEY

A cabernet from New Jersey with dinner? It’s no longer a completely far-fetched idea. As
of the early twentieth century, most states in the U.S. had wine industries. But a
combination of Prohibition, vine diseases for which there was then no remedy, and the
Great Depression led farmers to pursue other crops in place of wine grapes. Today, the
situation has completely turned around. All fifty states now have established wine
industries. We’ve covered California, Washington State, Oregon, New York, Texas, and
Virginia earlier in this chapter. Here are eight other states that make wines I think you’ll
want to taste and know about.
                                               ARIZONA

Whatever the Apache warrior chief Cochise envisioned as the destiny of his homeland, it
probably wasn’t as wine country. But on the parched, blindingly bright high desert of
southeast Arizona where Cochise once reigned, that’s exactly what has happened. Just 20
miles (32 kilometers) from the Mexican border, the cactus-ringed villages of Sonoita,
Sedona, and Wilcox (John Wayne westerns were filmed here) have sprouted the
improbable: small green vines that clutch the earth with true grit.
   Arizona’s three major winegrowing areas are all on high deserts, and although a
scorching desert climate would seem to preclude grape-growing, sixty-three wineries now
exist, thanks to irrigation. All is not quite perfect, however. As it turns out, the state’s
coyotes and javelinas not only adore grapes but also possesses a special fondness for the
flavor of irrigation hoses, without which no Arizonan winery could survive.




   A horse-drawn wagon may still be the best way to experience the vineyards of Arizona. Here, Sonoita Vineyards.

   The first attempts to grow grapes in Arizona were made by Franciscan missionaries in
the late seventeenth century, but the state’s modern wine industry didn’t emerge until the
1980s, when Dr. Gordon Dutt, who has a PhD in soil science from the University of
Arizona, planted grapes near Sonoita. Today, the leading wineries include Callaghan
Vineyards, Lawrence Dunham, Alcantara, Pillsbury, Javelina Leap, and Bitter Creek,
several of which make good red wines based on Mediterranean and Spanish varieties such
as tempranillo, mourvèdre, and grenache.
                                                MISSOURI

With 119 wineries, Missouri is one of the most prominent up-and-coming wine regions in
the United States. Until relatively recently, Missouri’s was a riches-to-rags story. In 1866,
George Husmann, a professor at the University of Missouri, prophesied that the United
States would one day be the world’s greatest wine-producing country. At the time, it
seemed as if his home state might lead the way; it ranked second in the nation in grape-
growing, and wines from Missouri quite frankly stunned critics in wine exhibitions in
Paris, Vienna, and elsewhere in Europe. The grape variety Norton, a hybrid, was
especially highly regarded—it was compared by one British wine expert to no less than
French Burgundy “without the finesse.” (As descriptions go, this was probably a bit
fanciful; Norton’s deep color, full body, and jammy fruit flavors are more reminiscent of
zinfandel than pinot noir.) Ultimately and unfortunately, a combination of disease
(especially mildew and rot), overproduction, and local Prohibition laws took their toll on
Missouri’s wine industry. By the 1880s, most vineyards were dying or abandoned. Those
that survived national Prohibition did so by reinventing themselves as juice and jelly
manufacturers.




 Stone Hill Winery in Hermann, Missouri, on the banks of the Missouri River. Before Prohibition, Hermann was one of
  the flourishing centers of wine in the United States, and Stone Hill Winery was one of the five largest wineries in the
                                                          world.

   A rebirth came in the 1970s and 1980s, with new laws that helped jump-start a modern
wine industry, and by 2010, Missouri was spawning nearly a dozen new wineries every
year. The top three producing wineries in Missouri are St. James, Stone Hill, and Les
Bourgeois.
                                  NEW MEXICO

In the 1990s, a sparkling wine named Gruet developed a cult following in knowledgeable
wine circles around the United States. On the face of it, there was nothing remarkable
about this; there were, after all, many terrific California sparkling wines made according
to the traditional (Champagne) method.
   But Gruet wasn’t from Napa or Sonoma, or for that matter from anyplace else in
California. Gruet was from Truth or Consequences, a small town in New Mexico, and as
surprising as that was, another surprise was in store when you called the winery looking
for the owner. A Frenchwoman got on the line.
   In 1983, Nathalie Gruet, her brother Laurent Gruet, and her husband, Farid Himeur,
moved from France to Truth or Consequences, a stark plateau 150 miles (240 kilometers)
south of Albuquerque, with the intention of making sparkling wine. As tourists years
before, they’d fallen in love with the American Southwest and instinctively felt that it was
wine country waiting to be discovered. Land prices were cheap. They figured that if the
wine they made turned out bad, they wouldn’t be out a lot of capital; if it turned out well,
the notoriety would launch them. And that’s exactly what happened. The first Gruet brut
was released in 1989 to amazing press reviews. Crisp, frothy, and elegant, it’s easily the
equal of many California sparklers.
   As in Arizona, New Mexico’s first grapes were planted in the seventeenth century by
Franciscan fathers who required wine for the Mass (this was earlier than in California by a
few decades). But as in so many other states, disease, severe weather, and national
Prohibition proved the New Mexican wine industry’s undoing. At least until the 1980s.
Today, New Mexico boasts fifty-two wineries, including two meaderies (wineries that
make mead, or wine from honey), proving that truth, consequences, and wine can be a
formidable combination.
                               PENNSYLVANIA

With hundreds of chardonnays made in California, you don’t expect to find one of your
favorites in Pennsylvania, but many wine lovers have. The state has more wineries than
most of us would guess—123. Pennsylvania was the location of one of the first successful
commercial winegrowing ventures in the United States: the Pennsylvania Wine Company,
which began in 1793 but closed soon thereafter, its vineyards decimated by disease.
Today, more advanced viticultural knowledge promises a brighter future for the state.
    Pennsylvania has highly diversified climates, and thus a wide variety of wines are
made. On the one hand, vinifera varieties such as chardonnay, pinot gris, and cabernet
sauvignon are quite successful here, but so are hybrids such as catawba, Cayuga,
chambourcin, seyval blanc, and Vidal blanc. In Pennsylvania’s far north, near Lake Erie,
icewines are made. As is true in New Jersey, Pennsylvania has a very active vintners’
alliance dedicated to improving quality—the Pennsylvania Wine Quality Initiative—
which is credited with raising wine quality dramatically in the past decade. Among
Pennsylvania’s top wineries: Chaddsford Winery, Windgate Vineyards, Mazza Vineyards,
and Twin Brook Winery.
                                             IDAHO

The first wineries in the Pacific Northwest were not in Oregon or Washington State but in
Idaho, the oft-forgotten third member of the Pacific Northwest triad. German and French
immigrants planted grapes here as early as 1864, but as with so many states, national
Prohibition took a debilitating toll on the industry and brought production to an absolute
halt.
   Today, the Idaho wine industry is in the process of a whirlwind rebirth. Just ten years
ago the state had eleven wineries; today it has forty-nine.




                    Harvesting grapes in the Snake River Valley of southwestern Idaho.

   That rebirth first began in the 1970s, when wine grapes were planted along the Snake
River Valley, in the southern part of the state. Indeed, the Snake River Valley—an 8,000-
square-mile (20,700-square-kilometer) expanse—was Idaho’s first American Viticulture
Area (AVA), having been approved in April 2007. The Snake River Valley is part of a
larger southwestern Idaho area that today has the highest density of vineyards and
wineries in the state.
    From a geographical standpoint, southern Idaho has several viticultural assets. The area
is at the same latitude as many European winegrowing regions, yet is sunnier and has far
less rainfall. The characteristic cold winters, which might at first seem a disadvantage, are
in fact quite conducive, allowing the vines to go completely dormant, thus conserving
important carbohydrates for the coming season and at the same time ridding the vines of
bugs and discouraging disease. In addition, the region’s summer combination of cold
nights and warm days helps create a good balance of sugars and acid, resulting in well-
balanced wines.
   Among the wineries to seek out: Cinder Winery, Coiled Winery, and Clearwater
Canyon Cellars.
                                     MICHIGAN

The first time I tasted a Michigan wine—it was a riesling from the small wine district Old
Mission Peninsula—I was pretty astounded. But perhaps I shouldn’t have been. Michigan
has had a well-established wine industry for decades, and the state’s climate is perfect for
varieties such as riesling, pinot gris, and gewürztraminer, that thrive in cool temperatures.
   The Michigan wine industry took its first formal step as far back as 1939, with the
establishment of the Michigan Wine Institute, a trade association formed to benefit local
grape growers. For many of these early decades, the industry revolved, as it did in nearby
New York, around French-American hybrid grapes such as Vidal blanc. But in 1969, Carl
Banholzer and Leonard Olson, owners of Tabor Hill Winery, in Buchanan, Michigan, took
the next step and planted the state’s first documented vinifera grape varieties—in this case,
chardonnay and riesling.
   There was no turning back. Lake Michigan’s temperate shoreline and the bounty of
cherry orchards and farmland enticed would-be wine-makers By the late 1970s, many of
Michigan’s important wineries were founded, including Leelanau Cellars, Fenn Valley
Vineyards, L. Mawby Vineyards, and Good Harbor Vineyards. Most importantly, large-
scale plantings of vinifera varieties began, notably at Chateau Grand Traverse, one of the
state’s important wineries on Old Mission Peninsula.
   That peninsula, by the way, is now one of Michigan’s most important AVAs. Old
Mission Peninsula extends north for 19 miles (31 kilometers) from Traverse City into the
Grand Traverse Bay of Lake Michigan, ending at Old Mission Point. The climate on the
peninsula is moderated by the surrounding waters, helping to prevent frost during the
growing season. Today, there are ninety-three wineries in Michigan. Among the most
influential: St. Julian Winery, Tabor Hill Winery, and Leelanau Cellars.
Punching down the “cap” of red grape skins at Chateau Grand Traverse on Old Mission Peninsula. One of Michigan’s
      most important wineries, Chateau Grand Traverse introduced vinifera varieties to Michigan in the 1970s.
                                           COLORADO

When you visit a hip city like Boulder, Colorado, it seems entirely logical that the state
has an enthusiastic wine culture. That comes as no surprise. What is surprising, however,
is viticulture in Colorado. The Rocky Mountain state’s 105 wineries are mostly nestled in
high-elevation river valleys and on mesas—many of which are at elevations of 4,000 to
7,000 feet (1,200 to 2,100 meters) above sea level, making Colorado’s vineyards some of
the highest in the world.
   At such elevations, nights are cold, but during the ripening season in late summer, days
are 30°F (17°C) warmer, dry, and sunny. Indeed, as in Argentina (where vineyards are
often 4,000 to 5,000 feet/1,200 to 1,500 meters in elevation), the grapes experience an
intense luminosity during ripening. In Colorado, that luminosity is coupled with long
daylight hours. The combination of these factors bodes well for an industry that is just
now beginning to get some traction. Among the most highly thought of wineries are
Winery at Holy Cross Abbey, Two Rivers Winery, Bookcliff Vineyards, Creekside Cellars,
and Garfield Estates Vineyard.




       Striking palisades loom over the vineyards of Palisade, near Grand Junction, in northwest Colorado.
                                   NEW JERSEY

The Garden State is often the butt of less-than-genteel jokes. But one thing that’s no joke:
New Jersey makes surprisingly good wines.
   The first time I tasted a group of New Jersey wines, I figured it would take a few
minutes and no more (very simple wines = fast tasting). But a half hour later, my tasting
group and I were still discussing how much the reds (especially merlot, cabernet
sauvignon, and cabernet franc) reminded us of Bordeaux.
   And speaking of Bordeaux: In New Jersey, an audacious tasting occurred in 2012 that
immediately put New Jersey wine on a whole new level. Called “The Judgment of
Princeton,” the tasting was modeled on the famous Judgment of Paris Tasting of 1976,
which put California wine on the international map. The Princeton Tasting was led by
none other than George Taber who, as a TIME magazine reporter in 1976, broke the Paris
Tasting story. For the Judgment of Princeton, nine judges from France, Belgium, and the
U.S. blind-tasted New Jersey wines against top Bordeaux—indeed, against the same top
Bordeaux as were included in the 1976 tasting: Château Mouton-Rothschild, Château
Haut-Brion, and others of high status. In the end, the highest-scoring white and red were
both French wines (a Joseph Drouhin Beaune Clos des Mouches and Château Mouton-
Rothschild, respectively). But—and here’s the astounding part—three of the four top
whites were from New Jersey, and the best New Jersey red ranked third.
   You could be cynical. You could make a dozen arguments about the questionable
validity of taste-offs. But, OMG. New Jersey rests her case.
  Among my favorite New Jersey wineries: Hawk Haven, Unionville Vineyards,
Ventimiglia Vineyard (which makes a stunning wine from the hybrid grape chambourcin),
Heritage Estate, Working Dog Winery, and Bellview.
The shaded areas of this map indicate entire states where wine is made. The actual vineyard areas are smaller and
                                          scattered throughout the state.
MEXICO

As an important wine region, Mexico may seem unlikely. Yet this is where the history of
wine in the Americas began. Indeed, the first winery in the New World—Casa Madero—
was established in 1597 in the Mexican town of Santa Maria de las Parras (“Holy Mary of
the Grapevines”), and the winery continues to thrive today.
   Like many wine drinkers, I once assumed that most Mexican wine would be cheap,
rough-and-ready stuff sold in supermarkets. Admittedly, such wines do exist in Mexico (as
they do nearly everywhere else). But beginning in the 1990s, and building on the success
of already established wineries like Monte Xanic, Santo Tomás, and L.A. Cetto, a group of
creative young winemakers quietly began making small lots of surprisingly delicious
wines. Today, Mexico’s rapidly growing fine wine industry is bursting with energy, and
the top wines are astonishing in quality.
    Mexico has some 7,660 acres (3,100 hectares) of vineyards, and wine is produced in
three principal areas—in the northwest, specifically in the Baja Peninsula, immediately
south of California; in the north central states of Coahuila, Durango, and Chihuahua, all
just south of Texas and New Mexico; and in the center of Mexico, in the states of
Zacatecas, Aguascalientes, and Queretaro. Of these three regions, more than 90 percent of
all fine wine is produced in Baja.
   The 1,012-mile-long (1,629-kilometer) Baja Peninsula is divided lengthwise by the
mineral-rich Sierra de Baja California mountain range, which effectively divides the
climate of the peninsula in half. All of the vineyards lie in arid valleys to the west of these
mountains, where the climate is Mediterranean-like and cold air from the Pacific Ocean
acts as a giant air conditioner, cooling the grapes. The main valleys extend, from the
thriving port city of Ensenada on the Pacific Ocean. (A gastronomically oriented city,
Ensenada is famous for its fish tacos, in which Pacific lobster or shark are deep-fried in
lard, then wrapped in fluffy, homemade flour tortillas.)
The vineyards of Adobe Guadalupe in Mexico’s Guadalupe Valley on the Baja Peninsula. Besides making excellent wine,
            the estate breeds prize-winning Azteca sport horses and has a stunning small hacienda-like inn.

       “Wine is our path of life. It is not what we do; it’s our path to who we are.”
                                                                 — JOSÉ LUIS DURAND,
                                                     winemaker and owner, Durand Viticultura

   The main valleys include Guadalupe, San Antonio, Ojos Negros, Santo Tomás, San
Vicente, and Llano Colorado. But of these, Guadalupe Valley is, by far, Mexico’s Napa
Valley. Here, along the largely unpaved Ruta del Vino (“Wine Route”) are some seventy
wineries, several of which also boast stellar avant-garde restaurants (Laja has exquisite
food), and small hacienda-like hotels (Adobe Guadalupe is a spiritual haven). The number
of physical wineries, however, does not directly reflect the booming industry here, for
many boutique wineries are brands that buy grapes and, lacking their own facilities, rent
space in other wineries. Many of these boutique wineries began as a result of La Escuelita
(“The Little School”)—part trade school, part wine boot camp, where locals are trained to
make artisanal wines by one of the most passionate Mexican enologists, Hugo d’Acosta,
owner of Casa de Piedra winery. (D’Acosta’s minerally, creamy chardonnay, called Piedra
de Sol, is one of the best chardonnays in Latin and South America.)
    At 231 square miles (598 square kilometers), Guadalupe Valley is almost as big as
Chianti Classico. Thanks to irrigation, green vineyards dot a ranching landscape that
otherwise is so dry that little besides chaparral and desert shrubs grow. The lack of water
is a concern for every vintner here and the leading limitation to further growth of the
valley’s wine industry. The soils are divided into those that are extremely sandy and
infertile, near the now-dry river and streams that once ran through the valley, and those
that are made up of eroded, decomposed granite washed down millennia ago from nearby
mountains. Salinity in these soils often adds an unusual, attractive “minerality” to the
flavor of the wines. Interestingly, the Guadalupe Valley wines that come from grapes
grown in the sandy soils often display the greatest elegance.
   As for grapes, Guadalupe Valley is a seemingly incongruous whirlwind of diversity.
The three main grapes used in top wines are tempranillo, nebbiolo, and cabernet
sauvignon, but many other varieties appear to do well here, including syrah, merlot,
cabernet franc, malbec, pinot noir, mourvèdre, grenache, and petite sirah among reds; and
among whites, sauvignon blanc, chardonnay, viognier, and chenin blanc. Rarely are the
grapes made into monovarietal wines. Instead, virtually all of the wines are blends—often
blends that have no precedent anywhere in the world (imagine, if you can, the flavor of a
wine based on a combination of nebbiolo, petite sirah, petit verdot, merlot, and cabernet
sauvignon).




                  In Mexico, as in California, the harvest is often done in the cool of night.

   A word on Mexican nebbiolo. As delicious as wines made from it can be, the
morphology of the leaves and clusters, as well as the character of the wine itself, indicate
that it’s not nebbiolo from Piedmont. (As of this writing, DNA analysis had not yet been
performed to determine the grapes’ genetic identity.) Indeed, leading enologists here
believe that Mexican nebbiolo is probably not a single variety, but several varieties that
were brought from Italy after World War II by the Italian winemaker Esteban Ferro, then
at Santo Tomás winery. Ferro’s cuttings were apparently stalled at the port of Veracruz for
a long period of time, and the identification tags, wet and disintegrating, were eventually
lost. But the cuttings were planted and collectively called nebbiolo.
   Mexican wines run the gamut from ethereally elegant and refined to powerhouses of
intensity. Like Mexican culture, the wines often seem to simultaneously possess fragility
and resilience. Among the best wines are Adobe Guadalupe’s Gabriel (a vividly alive and
rich Bordeaux-like blend of cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and malbec); La Lomita’s
Singular (always a dramatic, spicy, and distinctive red, although the blend changes
completely every year); and José Luis Durand’s Ala Rota and Ícaro (the first, a mostly
cabernet sauvignon and petite sirah blend that’s mind-blowingly elegant, minerally, and
delicious; the second, an intense, vivid, almost gamy wine based on nebbiolo and
Bordeaux varieties).
    Finally, because Mexico has no system of denominations of origin, many Mexican
wines are simply labeled “product of Mexico,” although some indicate the valley in which
most of the grapes grew. Additionally, no regulatory wine laws means that the varieties
listed on a label may or may not be listed in the order in which they dominate in the blend.
A wine labeled tempranillo, cabernet sauvignon, and syrah, could be mostly syrah.
                                                                                            CANADA

CANADA RANKS SIXTEENTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. CANADIANS
DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 4 GALLONS (15 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Canada is one of the newest wine regions in the New World. And like its southern
neighbor, the United States, the country possesses a pioneering spirit thanks to its early
days as a vast wilderness. Today, from seemingly out of nowhere, an exciting wine
industry has sprung, and the top Canadian wines—dry and sweet—are now turning heads
in competitions internationally. Though the industry is small, in the ten years between
2003 and 2013, the number of wineries here quadrupled. Today, there is no doubt that the
wine industry in Canada is on a roll and that many distinctive, exciting dry wines are
being made. As for Canada’s renowned, sweet icewines—prepare to be devastated by their
deliciousness.




     As the harvested grapes arrive, winemakers at Malivoire Winery in Ontario sort out any that aren’t perfect.

   Many Americans, and, indeed, many Canadians, may never have tasted a Canadian
wine (the modern industry is still in its infancy), but grape-growing actually began here in
the 1860s, when grapes intended for sacramental wine were planted near the Okanagan
Mission in British Columbia, as well as on Lake Erie’s Pelee Island, at a winery with
what, at the time, was the evocative name Vin Villa. Yet for more than a century, the
development of a prosperous wine industry was hampered by a complex series of political
and economic barriers, including the creation of government monopolies that controlled
the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages. It was not until the late 1980s and early
1990s that a modern wine industry finally took hold.
  Hillside vineyards in the sunny, dry Okanagan Valley of British Columbia. Millions of years ago, the hillsides were
                                            formed by receding glaciers.

   It is still a very tiny industry by world standards. As of 2012, there were approximately
29,000 acres (11,700 hectares) of vineyards in Canada. That’s less than the grape acreage
in Switzerland, for example, and even the small Napa Valley in California has one and a
half times as much vineyard acreage as Canada does.
   For an explanation of Canadian wine law, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 928.

                                THE QUICK SIP ON CANADA
          CANADA’S TINY WINE industry is one of the newest and most exciting in the New
          World.
          CANADA MAKES surprisingly excellent dry wines—especially rieslings and pinot noirs
          —as well as what has become one of the country’s super-stars—icewine, a rich, sweet
          nectar made from grapes frozen on the vines and harvested in the dead of winter.
          CANADA’S TWO most important wine regions are on opposite sides of the country—in
          the west, British Columbia (principally the Okanagan Valley); in the east, Ontario
          (principally the Niagara Peninsula).
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

I think of the wine regions of Canada as existing in a state of refrigerated sunlight. The
country’s cool, sunny, mostly dry climate and northern latitude come together to create an
ideal environment for making pristine wines with highly precise, pure flavors. Indeed, the
first research center dedicated to cool-climate grape-growing and winemaking—the Cool
Climate Oenology and Viticulture Institute—was established in Ontario in 1997.
                                THE GRAPES OF CANADA
                                               WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: A major grape, it can make very good wines ranging from lean, cool-climate styles to
 wines that are reminiscent of white Burgundies.
 GEWÜRZTRAMINER: One of Canada’s best-kept secrets. Can make beautifully aromatic, refreshing
 wines.
 PINOT GRIS: A major grape; it makes crisp, distinctive, high-quality whites.
 RIESLING: A major grape, made into sensational, concentrated, dry wines that are crisp and lively, as
 well as beautifully elegant icewines.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: An important grape; combined with sémillon, it makes good Bordeaux-style
 whites.
 VIDAL BLANC: A major French-American hybrid created in the 1930s in France. It makes what many
 consider to be among Canada’s best icewines, as well as good dry table wines.
 VIOGNIER: A minor grape, but it can make amazingly beautiful, fresh wines in the Okanagan Valley in
 particular.

                                                 REDS
 BACO NOIR: A French-American hybrid; it makes simple, fruity wines in Ontario, Quebec, and Nova
 Scotia.
 CABERNET FRANC: A major grape; it is made into sleek, dry reds in the manner of Chinon, from
 France’s Loire Valley, and also red icewines.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Often blended with merlot to make good, if usually lean, Bordeaux-style
 blends.
 GAMAY: A minor grape, but it can make some amazingly fruity, fresh wines evocative of good Beaujolais.
 MERLOT: Made as a single variety and combined with cabernet sauvignon and cabernet franc to make
 some good Bordeaux-style blends.
 PINOT NOIR: Canada’s star red grape, especially in the Okanagan Valley, where it makes elegant, silky
 pinot noirs reminiscent of those made in Burgundy and Oregon.
 SYRAH: A minor grape in terms of production, but growing. Thus far, it is made into some exciting wines
 reminiscent of those of France’s northern Rhône Valley. Shows promise.

   In particular, white varieties seem to soar with elegance and freshness here. The best
Canadian rieslings could fool you into thinking you’re drinking something from the Mosel
region of Germany; the best chardonnays have a sense of precision that white Burgundies
possess; the pinot gris are terrific wines—reminiscent of Alsace pinot gris; and the
aromatic varieties gewürztraminer and viognier may have their best New World homes in
Canada. As for red wines, pinot noir is the absolute star, making wines of world-class
stature. Red wines based on Bordeaux varieties are, as of this writing, perhaps not as
evolved, although cabernet franc shows promise.
       The Niagara Peninsula (best known for the Falls of honeymoon fame) makes surprisingly good wines.

      “I liken making pinot noir to waking up a woman at three in the morning. You
      never quite know what you’re going to get.”
                                                                         — LUKE SMITH,
                                                         owner and winemaker, Howling Bluff
                                                                    Winery, British Columbia

   Canada’s vineyards and wineries are concentrated in just two provinces: Ontario and
British Columbia, which, although on opposite sides of the country, more than 1,900 miles
(3,100 kilometers) apart, together account for 98 percent of the volume of premium
Canadian wine made. (Wine is also made in Quebec, and a tiny amount of sparkling wine
is made in Nova Scotia, although neither region yet makes wine in commercially
significant amounts.)
   Of the two states, most of the wineries (299 as of 2014) are located in British Columbia
and are small-production, family-run businesses. Despite their size, many wineries make
six to twelve different wines. It’s quite common for the lion’s share of these wines to be
sold from the wineries’ own tasting rooms.
                            COLD WINES AND HOT NIGHTS
 If you’re reading this book, you’re probably the kind of person who’d want to go to Niagara to taste some
 of Ontario’s top wines. But it’s worth noting that you could honeymoon there, too. Each year, more than
 fifty thousand people do. The tradition of honeymooning at Niagara Falls began in 1801, with the then-
 famous couple of Joseph Alston and Theodosia Burr, the daughter of U.S. Vice President Aaron Burr.
 Three years later, Napoléon’s younger brother, Jérôme Bonaparte, honeymooned there with his
 American bride, Elizabeth Patterson. The falls, which are composed of two major sections, the
 Horseshoe Falls on the Canadian side and the American Falls on the American side, were formed when
 glaciers receded at the end of the last Ice Age, and water from the newly formed Great Lakes carved a
 path through the Niagara Escarpment to the Atlantic Ocean. Today, more than 6 million cubic feet
 (169,900 cubic meters) of water falls over the crest line every minute in high flow. Interestingly, that water
 appears unusually green thanks to the 66 tons (60 metric tons) a minute of embedded dissolved salts
 and very finely ground rock generated by the erosive force of the Niagara River itself. Indeed, currently,
 the falls erode at a rate of about 1 foot (30 centimeters) a year. Scientists believe that, fifty thousand
 years from now, the remaining 20 miles (32 kilometers) to Lake Erie will have been undermined, and the
 falls will cease to exist. Presumably honeymoons will continue to endure.



                             THE VQA SEAL OF APPROVAL
    Most top Canadian wines carry a government seal with the letters VQA, which stand for Vintners Quality
    Alliance. Used on wines from Ontario and British Columbia (the tiny vineyards of Quebec and Nova
    Scotia are not yet included in the program), the VQA seal ensures that the wine has been professionally
    tasted and adheres to standards set forth by a board of Canadian vintners and growers. The VQA also
    stipulates how and when appellation names such as Okanagan Valley or Niagara Peninsula can be used,
    plus the percentages of grape varieties required in making the wine.

   Of the two regions, Ontario, despite having fewer wineries, is the larger producer,
accounting for more than 50 percent of all the wine made in the country. Ontario’s four
wine districts—Niagara Peninsula (the largest, with 14,000 acres/5,700 hectares of
grapes), Lake Erie North Shore, Prince Edward County, and Pelee Island—all lie along the
shores (or just offshore) of two of the Great Lakes, Lake Ontario and Lake Erie. Within
the Niagara Peninsula are fifteen smaller sub-appellations, many of which, like Beamsville
Bench and the Niagara Escarpment, have gained quite a bit of prestige for their wines.
   Ontario’s wine districts are Canada’s most southerly, but the icy arctic winds that sweep
across the region would render viticulture nearly impossible were it not for the warming
and moderating effect of the lakes. Like the lakes themselves, the wine districts of Ontario
were carved out by retreating ancient glaciers that left behind a variety of deep, well-
drained soils.
               THE MOST IMPORTANT CANADIAN WINES
                                     LEADING WINES
         CABERNET FRANC red
         CHARDONNAY white
         GEWÜRZTRAMINER white
         ICEWINE white and red (sweet)
         PINOT GRIS white
         PINOT NOIR red
         RIESLING white
         SAUVIGNON BLANC and white BORDEAUX-STYLE BLENDS
         SYRAH red
         VIDAL BLANC white

                                     WINES OF NOTE
         BORDEAUX-STYLE BLENDS (merlot and cabernet sauvignon) red
         GAMAY red
         SPARKLING WINE white
         VIOGNIER white

   British Columbia, at the 50th parallel in latitude, is Canada’s most westerly viticultural
area, and one of the newest top wine regions of the New World. It’s also one of the most
northern. Close your eyes when you taste, and you could be in the Mosel (if the wine is
riesling) or in Burgundy (if it’s pinot noir). British Columbia is made up of five wine
districts—the Okanagan Valley, Similkameen Valley, Fraser Valley, Gulf Islands, and
Vancouver Island. Of these, the 150-mile-long (240-kilometer) Okanagan Valley (known
as the “fruit bowl” of Canada) is where most of British Columbia’s wineries are located
and where any wine lover will be most impressed (and impressed you will be).
On the Niagara Peninsula, the gentle sloping vineyards of the Beamsville Bench district sit on an elevated escarpment.
Though it may not look like it, the region benefits from warming breezes during winter (and cooling breezes in summer).

    Although British Columbia is considerably farther north than Ontario, the temperatures
in the region are often warmer thanks to its climate and geography. This is especially true
of the sunny Okanagan Valley, which, while quite close to the Pacific Ocean as the crow
flies, is sheltered behind the curtain of the Coastal Mountain range. Rainfall here is scant,
and the southern end of the valley is in fact the northern tip of the Sonoran Desert. Days
are consistently bright with sunlight; nights are very cool—a viticulturist’s dream
scenario.

       The name Okanagan has two possible origins: Historians tell us it means
       “rendezvous” and refers to the meeting place on Lake Osoyoos where the
       Native Americans of Washington and British Columbia gathered annually to
       stock up on supplies, while a local legend has it that the name means “big
       head” and refers to an ancient native people of exceptional bravery.

    In the center of the Okanagan Valley is the long, narrow, pristine Okanagan Lake,
carved out by receding glaciers and so deep that the distance from the bottom of the lake
to the top of the surrounding mountains exceeds the depth of the Grand Canyon. All
around the lake, orchards and vineyards flourish, many of them located on lateral
outcroppings or “benches” created when the sides of the lake were scoured by giant blocks
of ice that repeatedly froze and melted. In the winter, this is ski country, but the very
warm, dry summers are perfect for growing all manner of fruit, including of course,
grapes. As such, the Okanagan is not exactly a “cool climate” in the traditional viticultural
sense, but, more accurately, a northern latitude with a short, warm growing season. As a
result, the wines, while displaying ripe, bright flavors, never have a flaccid, over-ripe
character. This fact is, of course, crucial for making British Columbia’s elegant pinot noirs
and rieslings.
        ONE OF CANADA’S BEST (FROZEN) ASSETS–
                      ICEWINE

Thanks to Canada’s reliably bone-chillingly cold winters, icewines are produced here
every year, and the wines are so ethereal, they have near mythic status and an international
following. Indeed, Canada is now the leading producer of icewine in the world.
   As is true in Austria and Germany, in Canada, icewine (or eiswein, as it is written in
Europe) is made only in the traditional, centuries-old manner, by allowing the grapes—
usually riesling or Vidal—to freeze naturally on the vine (as opposed to a shortcut
sometimes used elsewhere: freezing grapes in huge industrial freezers). When the outside
ambient temperature is no higher than 17.6°F (-8°C; a Canadian legal requirement), the
grapes are picked by hand, one frozen grape at a time. As the frozen grapes are pressed
(the yield of juice for icewine is a mere 15 percent of the yield of juice for regular table
wine), the sweet, high-acid, concentrated juice is separated from the ice. The ice is thrown
away and the resulting wine is made solely from the hyperconcentrated juice. (Usually, no
botrytis is involved.) By law, Canadian icewine must be 12.5 percent residual sugar (125
grams per liter), but there is no maximum, and indeed many are 20 percent or more. The
painstaking process is, needless to say, fraught with numerous difficulties, from the
exigencies of harvesting in subzero-degree weather to the challenge of dealing with
hungry bears, coyotes, deer, and birds, who can quickly strip the vines of every last sweet,
frozen grape.
   Virtually every top producer in Canada tries to make icewine at some point or another,
and many producers are renowned for them, including Cave Spring, Inniskillin, and
Mission Hill.




   In Ontario, frozen grapes, soon to be made into icewine, are netted to protect them from being eaten by wildlife.
                    CANADA’S OTHER GREAT ICE CAPADE
 The lusciousness of Canadian icewine has inspired another cool, delicious phenomenon in Canada—ice
 cider. Made principally in the province of Quebec, ice ciders can be produced in two ways: The apples
 (many different varieties) can be left on the tree to freeze and are then pressed, or the apples can be
 picked at the height of ripeness, pressed, and the juice set outside over the winter to freeze. In both
 cases, the concentrated juice is fermented for six months into a cider containing 7 to 13 percent alcohol.
 The purity and freshness of a sip is like biting into a hundred fresh apples at once. Some of the best
 producers include Neige, Domaine Pinnacle, and Clos St.-Denis.




                Snow-capped heirloom apples. Once frozen, they are destined to become ice cider.

   As you can imagine, the greatest Canadian icewines possess an almost otherworldly
contrapuntal tension between acidity and sweetness, making drinking them an ethereal
sensation. That’s saying it in an intellectual way. But here’s the kid-in-you version: You’ll
want to lick the bowl.
                            They forgot to write “Please Don’t Touch!” on the sign.

                    SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS IN CANADA
                                           BRITISH COLUMBIA
Blue Mountain • Burrowing Owl • Church and State • Culmina • Gray Monk • Hawthorne Mountain • Hester
   Creek • Howling Bluff • Konzelmann • Lake Breeze • Liquidity • Meyer Family • Mission Hill • Nk’Mip •
 Orofino • Osoyoos Larose • Painted Rock • Quail’s Gate • Red Rooster • Road 13 Vineyards • Sandhill •
          Sumac Ridge Estate • Summerhill • Tantalus • Tinhorn Creek Vineyards • Wild Goose
                                                 ONTARIO
13th Street • Cave Spring Cellars • Château des Charmes • Colaneri • Fielding Estate • Flat Rock • Henry
 of Pelham Estate • Inniskillin • Jackson Triggs • Le Clos Jordanne • Malivoire • Pillitteri Estates • Ravine
  Vineyard • Stratus • Tawse • Thirty Bench • Trius at Hillebrand • Vineland Estates They forgot to write
                                     “Please Don’t Touch!” on the sign.


                            WHEN YOU VISIT… CANADA
        GETTING MARRIED at Niagara Falls aside, one of the best ways to experience
        Canada is to visit its small wineries. Many offer not only tastings and tours but also
        breathtakingly beautiful scenery, and some have terrific cafés or restaurants. In
        addition, numerous festivals and concerts are held throughout the year.
                          The Canadian Wines to Know
Canadian wine is, of course, not a single thing; the wines of British Columbia and Ontario are distinctly different
from one another, thanks to the great distances that separate the two regions. What unifies the wines, however, is
their amazing progress. Barely thought about in the twentieth century, the wines of Canada are now deliciously
established “players” in the New World.

                                                    WHITES




                                                  COLANERI
                               ALLEGRIA | NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE, ONTARIO
                  52% gewürztraminer, 36% sauvignon blanc, 7% chenin blanc, 5% riesling
This fascinating and delicious wine was made appassimento style, an Italian term that means the grapes were
partially dried in order to concentrate their juices before they were pressed and fermented. The result is Allegria, a
wildly aromatic wine that is off-dry and beautifully fruity, with notes of white peaches, exotic oranges, and dried
apricots. In 1967, the Colaneri family came to Canada from Italy, and today, three generations are involved in
working on the vineyard.
                                                     CAVE SPRING

                    RIESLING | BEAMSVILLE BENCH, NIAGARA PENINSULA, ONTARIO
                                                      100% riesling
Whenever I taste this wine, I can’t help but think the word spring in the name is apt, for this riesling is as spring-
loaded as wine gets. The beautiful tangerine, peach, and star fruit flavors rush at you with such energy, it’s almost
as though the wine can’t talk fast enough. Founded by the Italian Pennachetti family in 1978, the winery is named
for the limestone caves and mineral springs discovered on the property by European settlers in the eighteenth
century.




                                                       TANTALUS

                     RIESLING | OLD VINE | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                                      100% riesling
The first buzz in the wine world that phenomenal wines were being made in Canada occurred in the 1990s, and
Tantalus’ dry riesling was invariably named as evidence. Made from vines planted in the 1970s, the wine has a
pure, crystalline focus and effusive exotic citrus flavors—like icicles of limeade. Darting around inside the main
flavor are shooting-star-like notes of apricot, peach, spices, and star fruit. This is a riesling lover’s riesling, and a
wine that’s both elegant and formidable.
                                        MISSION HILL FAMILY ESTATE

                RIESLING | MARTIN’S LANE | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                                    100% riesling
Mind-blowing in its sorbetlike intensity, Martin’s Lane dry riesling from Mission Hill ranks with the top rieslings of
the New World. Pure and vivid in flavor, it has an enticing, languorously silky texture. In great vintages, the fruit is
so dense it seems combustible. The wine is named after proprietor Anthony von Mandl’s father, Martin, and the
grapes are grown on the steepest slope on the estate.
                                                  PERPETUA

         CHARDONNAY | OSOYOOS VINEYARD | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                               100% chardonnay
Perpetua, a brand owned by Mission Hill, makes fantastic cool-climate chardonnays that have a precision and
distinctiveness not often found in New World chardonnay. This wine begins with high soprano notes of tangerine
and citrus, then descends in long sweeps to deep bass notes of earth and tarte Tatin. The Osooyos Vineyard, named
for nearby Odoyood Lake, is located in Canada’s only desert.
                                                MEYER FAMILY

             CHARDONNAY | OLD MAIN ROAD | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                                100% chardonnay
The Meyer Family chardonnays have beautiful richness wrapped around a core of freshness. The grapes for this
wine are often picked late into the fall, contributing perhaps to the wine’s “warm baked pears and cool whipped
cream” character. There’s also a deep earthiness to this and all of the four other Meyer Family chardonnays—a nod
to Burgundy, where the winemaker worked for a time.




                                                    LIQUIDITY

                           VIOGNIER | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                                  100% viognier
Viognier is not easy to make. The wine often gets bogged down in its own full body and heavy perfume. But
Liquidity manages to make one of the best in the New World. Fresh, humming with lovely acidity, and nearly
kinetic with light wisps of energy, the wine’s floral and peach flavors are like tiny lights twinkling on and off.
Liquidity, perched on an outcropping over Okanagan Valley, also makes very good pinot noir and has a fantastic
restaurant.
                                                  WILD GOOSE

                    GEWÜRZTRAMINER | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                              100% gewürztraminer
It wasn’t easy deciding which Wild Goose to write about—the pinot gris, the pinot blanc, or this gewürztraminer,
for these three Wild Goose whites are all exciting, deeply flavorful, elegant wines (the pinot blanc may be the single
best New World pinot blanc I’ve ever tasted). But I chose the gewürztraminer for its sheer beauty and utter
deliciousness. Wild Goose channeled Alsace on this one. The wine seems to lift out of the glass on aromatic waves
of rose petals, peaches, and spice. The flavors are finely etched and pure—peaches again, plus star fruit and
minerals. But best of all, the wine shows pedigree of place—gewürztraminer this refined can come only from a cool
climate and high latitude. Canada appears to be tailor-made.

                                                      REDS
                                                 MALIVOIRE
          GAMAY | COURTNEY | NIAGARA ESCARPMENT, NIAGARA PENINSULA, ONTARIO
                                                   100% gamay
Until I tasted this wine, I felt there was no delicious gamay in the Americas. But here it is: a magenta-colored
gamay with all the cool, vibrant freshness of a great Beaujolais. The wine’s exuberant fruitiness is laced with hints
of spice. Malivoire is owned by Martin Malivoire, a director of special effects for several Hollywood movies.
                                               HOWLING BLUFF

               SUMMA QUIES | PINOT NOIR | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                                  100% pinot noir
If I were tasting this wine blind and you told me it was Chambolle-Musigny, Burgundy, I’d believe it. Former
investment banker Luke Smith left his day job to build his modest winery by hand and plant every grapevine
himself. This wine—a testament to how good pinot noir in the Okanagan can be—has a sumptuous red fruitiness
and freshness, a sexy saddle-leather character, and an evocative earthy quality—like the smell of warm rocks after a
rainstorm.




                                                     STRATUS

                         CABERNET FRANC | NIAGARA-ON-THE-LAKE, ONTARIO
                                               100% cabernet franc
If cabernet sauvignon is about power, cabernet franc is about mystery. It doesn’t rush out of the glass and
overwhelm you with flavor. It waits, and draws you in. At least that is what the excellent Stratus cabernet franc
seems to do. As you might expect from a cool-climate cabernet franc, the wine is sleek and pretty, with notes of tar,
minerals, and grenadine. I am not surprised that wine-maker Jean-Laurent Groux is a native of the Loire Valley,
France, where cabernet franc excels.
                                               BURROWING OWL

                            ATHENE | OKANAGAN VALLEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA
                                      50% cabernet sauvignon, 50% syrah
Big red grapes like cabernet sauvignon and syrah generally don’t do well in cool climates like much of Canada’s.
But in the warmer pockets of the dry, sunny Okanagan Valley, it’s a different story. The rich aroma of this wine is
completely evocative of both varieties—a mélange of tobacco and cassis, plus spiced plums, menthol, and a tiny
nuance of gaminess. And the powerful structure gives the wine good grip on the palate. It’s definitely worthy of
slow-roasted game on a cold Canadian winter night.

                                             SWEET WINES




                                               CAVE SPRING
                          RIESLING ICEWINE | NIAGARA PENINSULA, ONTARIO
                                                   100% riesling
Mindlessly good. Cave Spring’s Riesling Icewine, at 22 percent residual sugar, starts with exquisite, sweet fruit that
seems charged by minerals. As in all great dessert wines, savoriness and acidity lurk just below the surface and
counterbalance the sweetness, giving the wine its complexity and mental intrigue. The grapes were allowed to
raisin on the vine, then were frozen solid by the cold winds of Lake Ontario, then hand-picked and pressed at
temperatures below 14ºF (–10°C); a phenomenal achievement.
                                                   INNISKILLIN

                    CABERNET FRANC ICEWINE | NIAGARA PENNINSULA, ONTARIO
                                                100% cabernet franc
This is a hard wine to make.… Cabernet franc (like all of the red Bordeaux varieties) has tannin, after all, and
tannin can taste drying and bitter (in the manner of espresso). So, can one make a luscious, sweet icewine from
cabernet franc? Inniskillin does. The wine, distinctive and unusual, is sweet, but then bitterness and acidity kick in,
giving it fantastic play between components. As for the fruits, one might imagine one is in the Canadian forest,
where tiny berries—black, red, and blue—thrive naturally. Inniskillin also makes a riesling icewine, of course, and
it’s drop-dead gorgeous.
                                                                  AUSTRALIA

      SOUTH AUSTRALIA | NEW SOUTH WALES | VICTORIA | WESTERN
                            AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIA RANKS SEVENTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE.
AUSTRALIANS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 8 GALLONS (30 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

If it were superimposed over Europe, Australia—a huge land-mass of 3 million square
miles (7.8 million square kilometers)—would stretch from London to the Black Sea. The
wine industry within this large country is one of the most dynamic and cutting-edge in the
world.
  The past few decades have been a period of phenomenal growth for Australian wine.
According to Wine Australia (formerly known as the Australian Wine and Brandy
Corporation), during the ten years from 1995 to 2005 alone, the number of wine
companies more than doubled (to more than two thousand); the grape crush more than
doubled to 2 million tons (1.8 million metric tons); and vineyard plantings tripled to
390,000 acres (157,800 hectares). Exports during this period quadrupled in value, and for
two countries—the United Kingdom and the United States—Australian wine, especially
good-value Australian wine, became a comfortable mainstay on the wine scene.
   High-tech could be the Australian wine industry’s middle name. Most wineries use
state-of-the-art equipment and employ wine-makers trained in the most advanced
techniques. Virtually every vineyard task, from pruning to harvesting, is automated. Yet,
for all this industrial sophistication, most Australian wines are rather like the Australians
themselves: charismatic and outgoing. This is certainly true of the country’s simple,
inexpensive wines. But even Australia’s most prestigious and complex wines, like
Penfolds Grange and Henschke’s Hill of Grace, have a hedonistic charm that makes them
disarmingly approachable.
   For a large part of the twentieth century, the majority of the wine made in Australia was
either cheap and sweet or had a substantial level of alcohol. But, as was true in the United
States, the industry here changed radically in the 1970s, as high-quality dry wines became
the focus. By the mid-1980s, Australia had a well-developed modern industry made up of
small, top-notch producers, as well as big brands focused on creamy chardonnays and soft
shirazes.
                          THE QUICK SIP ON AUSTRALIA
         AUSTRALIA BOASTS hundreds of small, top-notch producers of complex, age-worthy
         wines. But it’s also known for simple, good-value white and red wines that are
         mouthfilling and easy to drink.
         THE MOST RENOWNED, best-loved, and most widely grown grape is shiraz (the same
         as the French grape syrah), which is turned into irresistible red wines with deep berry
         flavors laced with spice.
         THE MAJORITY of Australia’s vineyards are clustered in the southeastern part of the
         continent, relatively near the major cities of Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide.
         However, one of the newest fine wine regions in the world, Margaret River, is on
         Australia’s west coast.

   Hollywood’s portrayal of Australia as an untamed outback populated mainly by sheep,
crocodiles, and kangaroos doesn’t quite square with most people’s idea of a top-class wine
region. Of course, vineyards are not planted in the desertlike center of the country, nor in
the steamy, tropically hot north. The greatest number are located in the cooler, southern
part of the continent, within a few hours’ drive of the coast.
   Today, there are just under 2,500 wineries in Australia, and they make every style of
wine: dry, sweet, still, sparkling, and fortified. More than forty varieties of grapes are
grown, but the five most important (by tonnage harvested) are shiraz (it alone accounts for
30 percent of the total wine grape acreage), chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and
sémillon. To that list, I’ll add grenache and riesling, which, while produced in smaller
amounts, are nonetheless important by virtue of their quality and distinctiveness.
   The first Australian vineyards were planted in New South Wales at the end of the
eighteenth century, more than one hundred years after the first vineyards were planted in
other parts of the New World, including Colonial Virginia, in the United States, and Cape
Town, in South Africa. The men who planted them were Australia’s first European
settlers, mainly Englishmen who knew a lot about drinking wine but little about growing
grapes. The vines they planted were cuttings of European (vinifera) varieties, generally
brought from the South African Cape of Good Hope, where ships stopped for provisions
en route to Australia.
   Unfortunately, the area where the first tiny vineyards were planted—part of a penal
colony—was so hot and humid that the grapes rotted and the vines died. Today, ironically,
Sydney’s botanical gardens are just across the road from that same spot. The Australian
settlers were undeterred. They moved slightly inland, to what is now the Hunter Valley,
and with practice, grew more adept at grape-growing. Between the 1850s and 1870s, as
new, more viticulturally savvy immigrants arrived, vineyards began to thrive.
   In 1877, phylloxera was discovered in Australia, specifically in the state of Victoria.
Although the pest did not spread to every other wine region, it effectively crippled some
important vineyards (especially in Victoria) before the vines could be replanted on tolerant
American rootstocks. Replanting resulted in the production of fine wines by some
producers, but others rebounded by doing the opposite—making cheap, sweet fortified
wines of passable quality, often from large tracts of hot, fertile, irrigated valley land.
   With the 1960s and 1970s, a new era dawned. Changing tastes, changing economic
forces, and the development of new wine technologies all propelled Australia toward the
modern wine industry that exists there today. Production statistics tell the story in a
snapshot. In 1960, only 1 million cases of dry table wine were produced. By 2010, the
amount had shot up to 134 million cases. (Alas, stupendous growth can have a downside.
Australia now produces so much wine that the Australians themselves only consume about
40 percent of what is made each year. Even the country’s well-established export markets,
such as Great Britain and the United States, cannot absorb it all. In 2010, Australia’s wine
industry leaders, including the Winemakers’ Federation of Australia, concluded that in
2009 the country produced 20 million to 40 million more cases of wine than it sold. Part
of the solution has been to voluntarily reduce vineyard acreage. In 2010, for example,
nearly 20,000 acres/8,100 hectares of vineyards were pulled out.)

              THE MOST IMPORTANT AUSTRALIAN WINES
                                        LEADING WINES
         APERA white (fortified, Sherry-style wine; dry and sweet)
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CABERNET-SHIRAZ BLENDS red
         CHARDONNAY white
         FORTIFIED TAWNY red (fortified, Port-style wine; sweet)
         GRENACHE-SHIRAZ-MOURVÈDRE BLENDS red
         MUSCAT white (fortified; sweet)
         PINOT NOIR red
         RIESLING white (dry)
         SÉMILLON white (dry and sweet)
         SHIRAZ red
         SHIRAZ-CABERNET BLENDS red
         TOPAQUE white (fortified; sweet)

                                        WINES OF NOTE
         CHARDONNAY-SÉMILLON BLENDS white
         SPARKLING white and red
         VERDELHO white
         VIOGNIER white

   In 1970, every single winery in Australia was family-owned, and today, scores of
small, high-end wineries—Clarendon Hills, Henschke, Grosset, Torbreck, Jim Barry,
Jasper Hill, and many others—still are. That said, the industry is now dominated by a
handful of very large, influential companies that together are responsible for the lion’s
share of all Australian wine. Two notable ones are Pernod Ricard, owner of the brands
Jacob’s Creek and Wyndham, and Treasury Wine Estates, which owns Penfolds,
Lindemans, Rosemount, Wynns, Mildara, and Wolf Blass (as an aside, they also own the
prominent California wineries Beringer, Stags’ Leap Winery, Etude, and Chateau St. Jean).
  “Great wine is born not in the vineyard, but in the brain.”
                                                             — BRIAN WALSH,
                                                director of winemaking, Yalumba

For an explanation of Australian wine law, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 928.
     [YELLOW TAIL]: THE CRITTER THAT STARTED A CRAZE
In 2001, a little Australian brand named [yellow tail]—the company stylizes [yellow tail] with brackets and
lowercase letters—entered the U.S. market with the goal of selling 25,000 cases. By the end of that first
year, the wine with the yellow kangaroo on the label had sold eight times that amount. It was only the
beginning. [yellow tail] sold two million cases in the U.S. in its second year and an incredible eight million
cases by its fifth year. By 2012, it was the single largest-selling imported wine in the U.S. and the fastest-
growing brand in the history of the U.S. wine industry. Why did a simple wine—so undistinguished in
terms of quality—achieve such success? The critter was, of course, cute. But [yellow tail] somehow
captured a craving for the uncomplicated. It was easy to understand and easy on the wallet, and it
ushered in a whole new wave of wine consumers. Wine’s “critter era” had begun. Today, labels around
the world sport not only kangaroos but also scores of other animals, including elephants, frogs, wild
boars, bobcats, chickens, alligators, buzzards, butterflies, beavers, bees, aardvarks, and eagles
(screaming, of course).
            TWO PHILOSOPHIES OF WINEMAKING

Conventional European wisdom holds that good wine comes from specific sites that have
distinctive terroirs. Accordingly, some of Australia’s very best wines come from single
vineyards in top regions such as Coonawarra, Barossa Valley, Margaret River, and others.
   However, many Australian winemakers believe that good wine needn’t derive from a
single terroir, or even from a small number of them. Instead, these Australian winemakers
arrive at a good wine through an extensive process of selection and blending.
   For example, the grapes for many Australian wines are grown over vast stretches of
territory. Wines labeled South Eastern Australia, for instance, may be made with grapes
grown anywhere within the southeastern part of the entire continent. (This philosophy is
not at work quite as much in the United States, where it would be unusual to blend, say, a
batch of chardonnay from southern California with a batch from Washington State and
then label it Western U.S.A. Chardonnay.)
   The process of selecting and blending is practiced mostly for the production of lower-
and moderately priced wines. The goal here is to make brands of wine that have fairly
consistent flavors year after year, in the manner of beer. Simple, inexpensive wines like
Jacob’s Creek and Yalumba’s “Y” Series, for example, are dependably tasty no matter the
vintage.
   What’s surprising (at least to a traditionalist) is that, in addition to low-priced, everyday
wines, some of the most prestigious wines in Australia are also made by the process of
selecting and blending. Australian winemakers know they may lose a bit of the sense of
place when they blend wines from different sites, but they are hoping to achieve more
complexity. As an Australian winemaker once said to me, “How interesting would a
perfume be if it was just one aroma?”
   One of the best examples of the selecting and blending philosophy is Australia’s most
legendary and expensive wine, Penfolds Grange—a blend of shiraz grapes (sometimes
with small amounts of cabernet sauvignon) grown in various vineyards as many as 600
miles (970 kilometers) apart. To make Grange, winemakers at Penfolds start out with
tanks and barrels holding the equivalent of 40,000 cases of wine. After selecting the very
best lots and blending them together, fewer than 7,000 cases of Grange are made. The
remaining lots go down the ladder to make progressively more humble-quality and less
expensive Penfolds wines.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Australia, along with India and Africa, is one of the oldest landmasses. The ancient,
weathered soil here is impoverished and, in many places, highly eroded. In the center of
the continent is the vast, flat, arid area known as the Outback, where it often fails to rain
for years. Yet water surrounds the continent on all sides—the Timor and Arafura Seas and
the Gulf of Carpentaria to the north, the Coral Sea and the Tasman Sea to the east, and the
Indian Ocean and Southern Ocean to the west and south, respectively. Antarctica is about
2,380 miles (3,830 kilometers) away.




      Kangaroo Island scallops—a sure sign you’re in Oz. Especially good with a glass of brisk, cold sémillon.
                                     BINS AND SHOWS
Australian wines are labeled varietally, making label reading easy enough. But there are two
idiosyncracies that will be helpful for a wine drinker to know about: bin numbers and designations such
as Show Reserve.
    Bin numbers are used by many Australian wine companies as the names of various wines. Penfolds,
for example, makes three cabernet sauvignons—Bin 407, Bin 707, and Bin 389—each of which is a
different blend and is priced differently. Probably the most recognized bin number is Lindemans Bin 65
chardonnay, one of the biggest-selling brands of chardonnay in the world. Bin numbers were put on
Australian wine labels as early as the 1930s, although it’s not clear exactly when the practice began.
Originally the numbers were probably a winemaker’s way of tracking the wines through blending and
aging, and signified the underground cellar bin or place in the winery where a given wine was typically
stored year after year. The shorthand stuck, and now countless Australian wines are known by their bin
numbers.
  Special designations, such as Show Reserve, frequently appear on wine labels, but such terms have
no legal definition. Rather, they refer to the fact that the wine has won an award in one of Australia’s
many wine shows or competitions. More than wine drinkers elsewhere in the world, Australians take wine
competitions seriously and have a good deal of faith in their results.
                             THE GRAPES OF AUSTRALIA
                                                WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: The leading white grape, made into wines that span all levels of quality, from simple,
 fruity quaffers to lush, complex, elegant wines.
 MUSCADELLE: Renowned in the Victoria wine district of Rutherglen, where it makes the rare but
 renowned sweet, fortified wine known as topaque, once called Australian tokay.
 MUSCAT BLANC Á PETITS GRAINS: Considered the best of the different varieties with the word muscat
 in their names. It makes the rare but extraordinarily sweet, fortified muscat wines of Rutherglen in
 Victoria.
 RIESLING: A major grape with a long history in Australia, it makes dry, racy wines evocative of exotic
 citrus. It also ages beautifully into wines with creaminess and almost Danish pastry–like characters.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: A minor grape, but some excellent examples exist. It is often blended with
 sémillon in the manner of white Bordeaux.
 SÉMILLON: A major grape and a signature of Australia, especially in the Hunter Valley, of New South
 Wales and in the Margaret River area of Western Australia. It makes snappy, tightly wound wines when
 young. With age, the wines undergo a magical transformation, becoming honeyed, with rich lanolin
 textures.
 VERDELHO: A minor grape, but fascinating, since it was brought to Australia directly from the
 Portuguese island of Madeira in the 1820s. Grown mostly in Western Australia, it makes good, tasty
 wines with soft, fruity flavors.
 VIOGNIER: A minor grape, but surprisingly excellent examples exist—especially in the Barossa Valley.

                                                  REDS
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: A major grape that can make delicious, powerfully structured wines with
 notes of green tobacco, especially in Coonawarra and Margaret River. It is considered by some
 Australian vintners to be more sophisticated than shiraz, with which it is sometimes blended.
 GRENACHE: An important, distinctive grape that makes rich, concentrated red wines with a core of
 cherry jam character, especially when made from grapes grown in older vineyards. It is also commonly
 blended with shiraz and mourvèdre to make Rhône-style blends and is used as a main part of the blend
 in many of the country’s sensational Australian fortified tawnies.
 MERLOT: Significant in terms of production, but largely undistinguished in quality. It is grown mostly for
 use in cabernet sauvignonmerlot blends.
 MOURVÈDRE: An important grape, especially for Rhône-style blends, in which it’s combined with shiraz
 and grenache. Also used along with grenache as part of the blend in Australia’s fortified tawnies. Also
 referred to as mataro.
 PINOT NOIR: On the rise in production, although the jury is out on eventual success. It is grown
 especially in the cool areas of Victoria and makes good and occasionally great still pinot noir, and is used
 as well for sparkling wines.
 SHIRAZ: The leading red grape, the same as the French grape syrah. At its best, it makes seductive,
 lusciously textured, complex wines. It is sometimes blended with cabernet sauvignon, or with grenache
 and mourvèdre in Rhône-style blends, and is also used in Australia’s top fortified tawnies.

   Virtually all of the vineyard land—some 417,000 acres (168,800 hectares) as of 2012—
(not to mention most of the population) is clustered in the southeastern or southwestern
corners of the continent. In the southeast, wine is made in three important states: South
Australia (nearly half of all the vineyards in the country are planted in this one state), New
South Wales, and Victoria. In the southwest is the lone wine state of Western Australia.
   Whether they are in the southeast or southwest, most of these regions share a sunny,
fairly stable, Mediterranean-like climate. In some parts, however, despite warm days,
nighttime temperatures can be quite cold. Which is how Australia can, paradoxically, be
known for great dry riesling (a cool-climate grape) at the same time as it is known for
great cabernet sauvignon (a warmer-climate grape). The harvest takes place during the
southern hemisphere’s summer, February through May.




  A cherished old vine in what is probably the oldest cabernet sauvignon vineyard in the world—Penfolds’s legendary
                                             Block 42 in the Barossa Valley.

   Naturally, there are challenges. Rot, frost, drought, and strong, salt-laden winds all take
their toll in various districts. Not to mention kangaroos, which jump (literally, of course) at
the chance to feed on the soft leaves and buds of young vines. High fences topped with
barbed wire surround some vineyards to keep the herbivorous marsupials out.
   Given its fairly limited population, Australia lacks a ready supply of harvest workers.
As a result, viticulture here is the most mechanized in the world. While some small,
prestigious vineyards are cared for by hand, often by Southeast Asian field workers, in
most Australian vineyards, machines perform almost every critical task, including picking
the grapes, pruning the vines, spraying for disease, trimming leaves during the growing
season, and so on.
   Here is a quick look at some of Australia’s signature grapes and the wines made from
them, starting with white grapes, then progressing to red.

RIESLING
In Australia, riesling goes back to the 1840s, predating chardonnay by more than a
century. Today, most Australian wine experts consider riesling and sémillon to be the two
great Australian whites. Most of the country’s top rieslings come from either Eden Valley
or Clare Valley (named after County Clare in Ireland), both of which are north of the city
of Adelaide, in the state of South Australia. That said, some terrific rieslings are also to be
had from Victoria, Western Australia, and even the large island of Tasmania.




    Chardonnay grows on gentle slopes in the Adelaide Hills. With its creamy, mouthfilling character, Australian
                            chardonnay first took the world by storm in the 1980s.

   The first time I tasted a group of top Australian rieslings, I was struck by two things.
First, they didn’t taste anything like the rieslings of Germany, Austria, or Alsace. Second,
they didn’t taste conventionally Australian, by which I mean they weren’t big, soft, dense,
or any of the other descriptors that have come to be widely associated with Australian
wine.
   Indeed, Australian rieslings are as unique as they are counterintuitive. These are
snappy, frisky rieslings with an electrical current of acidity. Bracing and bone dry, they are
usually light to medium in body and very elegant. Most are aromatic, minerally, and
especially evocative of citrus zest and citrus marmalade. Because they are so pure, fresh,
crisp, dry, citrusy, and light, they are enchanting with seafood, and are terrific with dishes
that incorporate aromatic Asian ingredients like Kaffir lime, lemongrass, and ginger.
Lastly, like riesling from all great areas, Australian riesling ages beautifully and
gracefully. I love the rieslings from Pewsey Vale (especially The Contours), Petaluma
(especially Hanlin Hill), Grosset (especially Polish Hill), Kilikanoon (especially Mort’s
Reserve), Henschke (especially Julius), Leo Buring, Craigow, and De Bortoli.
CHARDONNAY
Chardonnay is so popular in Australia (a 500 percent increase in production occurred
between 1986 and 1996 alone), you’d think the Aussies invented it. Virtually every firm
now makes the wine, yet as late as 1967 there was only a minuscule number of
chardonnay vines in the entire country. (Tyrrell’s, in the Hunter Valley of New South
Wales, made the first chardonnay in 1971, calling it Vat 47 Pinot Chardonnay.)
   When Australian chardonnays first burst onto the international scene in the early 1980s,
there were few white wines like them anywhere. They were so creamy, it seemed as if a
spoon would stand up in them. Chardonnay lovers went mad. Today, Australia’s greatest
chardonnays take a more elegant approach. Although the wines are certainly rich, they are
refined as well. Among the very best of these are Leeuwin Estate’s Art Series, Penfolds
Yattarna, Vasse Felix, Giaconda Estate, Domaine Epis, Mount Mary, and Rosemount
Estate’s Roxburgh, all phenomenal wines suffused with flavor.
                                    OLD, OLDER, OLDEST
 Amazingly, many of the oldest cabernet, syrah, and grenache vines in the world are in Australia. It’s no
 surprise, then, that the words old vines often show up on wine labels. Yet, as is true in other countries,
 the term is not legally defined in Australia. In the beginning of the 2000s, the family winery Yalumba
 sought to clarify the issue by creating an Old Vine Charter that defines just how old an old vine is. In
 2009, this was adopted and expanded by other Barossa wine-growers to create the Barossa Old Vine
 Charter. It designates the following age classifications:

                                               OLD VINE
 A vine at least thirty-five years of age. Vines of this age are beyond adolescence and have a fully mature
 trunk and root system.

                                          SURVIVOR VINE
 An antique vine, defined as a vine of at least seventy years of age. Such vines have weathered
 significant fluctuations in climate, as well as social and political changes that have influenced Australia’s
 wine industry.

                                      CENTENARIAN VINE
 An exceptionally old vine of at least one hundred years of age. These vines have thick, gnarly trunks and
 were planted at a time before irrigation or trellising were possible.

                                         ANCESTOR VINE
 A vine at least 125 years old. These vines are considered living tributes to Australia’s European settlers.


SÉMILLON
The most novel white grape in Australia, however, is sémillon, which the Australians
pronounce SEM-eh-lawn and spell semillon—without the accent used in France; for
consistency’s sake, I’ve kept the accent here. Australia is sémillon’s second-most-famous
home, after Bordeaux (the dry whites of Bordeaux, as well as sweet Sauternes and Barsac,
are traditionally made by blending sémillon with sauvignon blanc).
   When young and when grown in top vineyard sites, Australian sémillon is as tight, tart,
and edgy as white wine gets. It’s a wine for acid freaks (the nickname for wine drinkers—
and I’m one—who love acidity). This young, dagger-sharp style evolved in Australia’s
Hunter Valley, in the state of New South Wales. There, the unusually cloudy, rainy climate
compelled winemakers to pick sémillon early (when it was barely ripe), before the onset
of autumn rains. With time, these young sémillons became famous for their dramatic,
kinetic snap.
   Today, though, delicious young sémillon is also grown in the Adelaide Hills of South
Australia and in the Margaret River region of Western Australia, where it is blended with
sauvignon blanc to make sophisticated white blends not unlike a good Pessac-Léognan,
from the Graves region of Bordeaux (try Cape Mentelle’s version).
                               BUBBLES AND THE BARBIE
 About 10 percent of Australian wine production are sparkling wines. These are made by the traditional
 (Champagne) method, from pinot noir and chardonnay, and are brut (dry) in style. In character, most are
 fresh, lively, and unfussy, lacking the complexity of Champagne. It’s easy to imagine oceans of such
 bubbly being downed while yabbies (freshwater Australian crawfish) are searing on the barbie
 (barbecue). Among the best Australian producers is the French Champagne house of Moët & Chandon,
 whose subsidiary, Domaine Chandon Australia, makes a whole range of sparklers, from blanc de blancs
 to rosés. And finally, although it’s not particularly sophisticated, sparkling shiraz must be mentioned.
 Spunky, fruity, and vividly red, sparkling shiraz is an Aussie signature. The wines are intense with
 raspberry, strawberry, blackberry, and spice notes. Generally, the dosage (approximately 3.5 percent, or
 35 grams of sugar per liter) is twice that of standard brut sparkling wine in order to balance the tannin in a
 bubbly made with red grape skins. The first red sparklers in Australia were made in the 1840s and called
 sparkling Burgundies. Seppelt, still a leading producer, has made red sparklers on a continual basis
 since the 1890s.

   Interestingly, with aging time in the bottle, Australian sémillon displays radically
different characteristics than young sémillon. After five years or more, the best wines take
on honey, brioche, and roasted cashew flavors, plus a wonderful, lanolin-like texture. No
one who loves Australian wines should miss the magnificent sémillons of Tyrrell’s
(Tyrrell’s Vat 1 is possibly the most awarded Australian wine ever made), Hart & Hunter,
Vasse Felix, Rothbury Estate, Thomas Wines, and Tim Adams.

CABERNET SAUVIGNON
Many winemakers consider cabernet sauvignon the elite red grape of Australia, although
shiraz may be closer to many Australians’ hearts. Cabernet is not new to Australia. Indeed,
the grape was planted here in the mid-nineteenth century. In fact, the cabernet vines
planted in 1888 in Penfolds’s famous 10-acre (4-hectare) Block 42 parcel within the
Kalimna Vineyard, in the Barossa Valley, are thought to be the oldest cabernet sauvignon
vines in the world. The vines are on their own roots, not grafted on rootstock. (With the
2004 vintage, Penfolds held back a tiny portion of the wine from the Block 42 vineyard
and kept it separate from their main blends. After aging it for several years, the company
released just twelve bottles of the wine in 2012. Each bottle of Block 42 was packaged in
a handblown glass sculpture and sold for about $168,000.)
   The simplest cabernets are blackberry flavor-packed bargains. But at the very top,
Australian cabernets are refined and complex. Cabernets such as Henschke’s Cyril
Henschke, Wendouree, and Penfolds Bin 707 bring together the gripping structure of a
good Bordeaux with pure, concentrated black currant flavors, graced by notes of green
tobacco and a green chaparral character. Many of these top cabernets come from either
Coonawarra, a small region in South Australia known for its red, clay-over-limestone
soils, or the Margaret River region, of Western Australia.
   Not surprisingly, cabernet is also often blended with shiraz—an inspired idea,
especially when the blend captures cabernet’s prodigious structure and at the same time
has shiraz’s succulent core of fruit. Yalumba’s Signature Cabernet Sauvignon/Shiraz, from
the Barossa Valley, and Penfolds Bin 389 Cabernet Sauvignon/Shiraz, from South
Australia, are both fantastic examples.
         SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF AUSTRALIAN CABERNET
                             SAUVIGNONS
 Several of the following producers are large and make wines at many price levels. Their top cabernets are
                                   generally their most expensive wines.
  Cape Mentelle • Cullen • Greenock Creek • Hardys • Henschke • Leeuwin Estate • Moss Wood • Noon •
                            Penfolds • Vasse Felix • Wendouree • Yarra Yering


GRENACHE
Grenache was probably brought to Australia in the late 1820s and 1830s by James Busby,
known as the father of Australian and New Zealand viticulture. (Having studied viticulture
and winemaking in France and Spain, Busby arrived in Australia in 1824 and helped
establish the Hunter Valley as one of the country’s premier wine regions.) It’s thought that
Busby brought the grenache directly from Spain, the variety’s ancestral home. Yet, despite
the direct link, Australians call the grape by its French name, grenache, rather than its
original Spanish name, garnacha. Today, one-hundred-year-old grenache vineyards still
exist in Australia, and the grapes are used to make sensational table wines. Interestingly,
much of this now treasured grenache would have been pulled out in the early and mid-
twentieth century, except for the fact that grenache was (and still is) the “secret sauce” that
made many of Australia’s fortified wines taste so good.
   Much of the great grenache in Australia is grown in the state of South Australia, in
particular in McLaren Vale and the Barossa Valley. The grapes are sometimes made into
single-varietal wines, and sometimes into blends of grenache with syrah, or with syrah and
mourvèdre (the so-called “GSM” wines).




                                Kangaroos in the vineyards of South Australia.

  A top Australian grenache is a vibrant, spicy, kirschlike wine with a rich core of
boysenberry and cherry confiture flavor. While not as massive as shiraz or cabernet, it is
nonetheless more full-bodied than pinot noir, making it, for many Australians, the perfect
red wine.
  Grenaches like d’Arenberg’s The Beautiful View, or Kilikanoon’s The Duke, or
Yalumba’s Bush Vine are not to be missed.

SHIRAZ
And finally, there’s shiraz, which is to Australia what cabernet sauvignon is to Bordeaux
—the signature. Australians are chauvinistically crazy about it, and not surprisingly it’s
the leading variety in terms of production. The sheer number of spellbinding small-
production shirazes in Australia is dizzying.
    Shiraz is another name for the grape syrah. Interestingly, until the 1980s, Australians
called syrah “hermitage” and occasionally “shiraz.” But because Hermitage is an official,
protected appellation in the northern Rhône Valley of France, use of that term was
ultimately deemed unfair to French vintners. Thus, for the past two decades in Australia,
syrah has been known almost exclusively as shiraz, although the derivation of the name
remains something of a mystery. One myth—that the grape originated in the Persian city
of Shiraz—has been shown by DNA typing to be exactly that: a myth. (Syrah/shiraz is
indigenous to east-central France.) But myths aside, what is known is that syrah has
several closely related names in France. There, it’s been known as schiras, sirac, syra,
syrac, serine, and sereine. Indeed, prior to the mid-nineteenth century, Australians
sometimes called the grape scyras. In the end, the term shiraz is probably yet another
linguistic variation on the name of a grape with a long line of similar-sounding names.

                                EUCALYPTUS ELUCIDATED
    One of the signature aromas and flavors of many Australian wines (especially shiraz and cabernet
    sauvignon) is eucalyptus—a fresh, cool, minty, and even medicinal character. How is this possible? The
    presence of eucalyptus-like aromas and flavors is directly related to a vineyard’s proximity to eucalyptus
    trees (which are native to Australia). The closer the trees to the vineyard, the stronger the character in the
    wine. It is believed that the compound responsible for this distinct character (1,8-cineole, commonly
    referred to as eucalyptol) accumulates on the skins of the grapes and from there, combines with the juice
    during maceration. This may explain why white wines (which are quickly pressed and separated from
    their skins) generally have little eucalyptus character, but red wines (which are often macerated with their
    skins) can have moderate to even high levels.

    There is no doubt that shiraz helped establish Australia as one of the world’s top wine-
producing countries. The wine’s seductive aromas, up-front, unctuously soft texture, and
saturated berry flavors are impossible to ignore. The best of these wines are a hedonistic
puddle of flavor—dark plum, boysenberry, blueberry, and mocha, with hints of spice,
violet, and black pepper, plus an echo of gaminess and often an iron (ferrous) quality. By
comparison, they are much more saturated with fruit than the syrahs of the Rhône. Which
is not to say they are all the same. Australian shirazes can differ considerably depending
on the region(s) where the grapes were grown. In general, cooler-climate Australian
shirazes are more spicy and savory than their warmer-climate cousins. And shiraz is often
blended with grenache to make sensational, complex wines (labeled shiraz/grenache) with
dark, sappy, rich cherry confiture and chocolate flavors, often overlaid by a sense of
minerals and tar. S.C. Pannell Shiraz/Grenache, from McLaren Vale, and Charles Melton
Nine Popes Shiraz/Grenache, from the Barossa Valley, are impressive, delicious examples.
   The most iconic—and expensive—Australian shiraz is Grange (once called Grange
Hermitage), made by the powerful wine firm Penfolds. Dr. Christopher Rawson Penfold,
an Englishman, emigrated to South Australia and, in 1844, established Penfolds to make
Port-style wines for his anemic patients. Grange was first made in 1951 by Penfolds’s then
winemaker Max Schubert, who, after a trip to Bordeaux during which he tasted the wines
of several great châteaux, wanted to make a wine of similar intensity, structure, depth, and
ageability—but using shiraz grapes.




   With the 1953 vintage, the wine was released to the market. Alas, critics were not kind.
One belittled it as “a concoction of wild fruits and sundry berries with crushed ants
predominating.” Today, Grange is widely praised for its power, concentration, elegance,
and beautiful flavors and aromas of leather and tobacco mingled with boysenberries and
mint. To make Grange, Penfolds winemakers blind-taste hundreds of different shirazes
from vineyards they own or have contracts with all over Australia. In the end, fewer than
seven thousand cases of Grange are made each year. And while the wine may be 100
percent shiraz in some years, it isn’t always so. Depending on the character of the shirazes
in any given year, small amounts of cabernet sauvignon may be added to the final blend.
The wine is always aged in brand-new American oak.
The wrinkled, purple skins of shiraz grapes left behind after wine is made at Jim Barry winery, one of the top family
                                  estates in the Barossa Valley of South Australia.
                                      STICKIES

Australia makes some of the world’s most wickedly exquisite fortified sweet wines. To
me, they are nothing short of ravishing. Just the thought of drinking one gives me a rush.
And while Australia has made them for centuries, they remain largely unknown (a crime
to be sure).
   Australians call them stickies—a catchall term for both sweet fortified wines and their
sweet, but not fortified, cousins. There are several types. The most sensational and rare of
the stickies are Australia’s sweet fortified muscats and topaques, made in Rutherglen, in
the northeast corner of Victoria. (Topaques were formerly known as tokays, but the name
was changed in 2010 as a result of an agreement between Australia and the European
Union, in which Australia agreed to recognize Tokay—or Tokaji, as it is written in
Hungarian—as the name reserved exclusively for a historic appellation in Hungary.)
Muscats and topaques have an almost primordial character. Nearly black in color, with
slashing glints of orange and green, they ooze around the sides of a wineglass, taking their
time. Drinking them is a mind-blowing experience; indeed, it seems to take forever for the
languorous sensation of flavor to end.
    The muscats are made from a brownish-tinged version of the white grape muscat blanc
à petits grains; the topaques, from the white muscadelle grape (the latter is sometimes
listed on wine labels as topaque muscadelle). The best are usually made in tiny quantities
and are rarely exported. To make the wines, the grapes are left on the vine long after the
normal harvest, until they begin to shrivel and their sugar intensifies. During fermentation,
the soupy mass of crushed grapes is fortified with neutral grape spirits, which stops the
fermentation, leaving a wine with natural residual sugar. The wine is then aged for ten to
twenty years or more in small, used oak barrels (not brand-new) set up like a Sherry solera
(see page 458), until the wine takes on unreal, hard-to-describe flavors reminiscent of
toffee, brown sugar, vanilla, chocolate, fig syrup, miso, molasses, and honey. Among the
best sweet, fortified muscats and topaques are those produced by Chambers Rosewood
Vineyards, Campbells Wines, and Morris.
       The second vintage (1952) of Penfolds Grange—its label still mostly intact—being poured for a guest.

   Next are Australian Port-style wines, now called Australian fortified tawnies.
Australian fortified tawnies, most of which are made in South Australia, are made in a
way roughly approximate to that used for Portuguese tawny Ports, although the Australian
versions are sometimes vintaged wines, and shiraz, grenache, and mourvèdre (which
fortified wine producers often call “mataro”) are used instead of native Portuguese grapes.
The finest Australian fortified tawnies are as complex (if not more) as Portuguese tawny
Ports and are surging with dramatic, rich, nutty, caramelly, espresso, citrus, and spice
flavors, and unreal colors that often seem flecked with neon orange. The two blockbusters
of the genre are Seppeltsfield DP 90 and Seppeltsfield Para—with luscious fortified
tawnies also made by Penfolds, Yalumba, Reynella, and Stanton & Killeen.
   As for Australian Sherry-style wines (now called “apera”), they are made using two
Spanish grapes, palomino and Pedro Ximénez, sometimes with muscat gordo blanco
blended in. Made in minute quantities, the best come pretty close to having the finesse,
complexity, and flavor of true Spanish Sherry. Again, Seppeltsfield makes a very fine one.
  In addition to topaques, muscats, fortified tawnies, and aperas, Australia also boasts
numerous nonfortified sweet wines made from late-harvested grapes, usually riesling or
sémillon, that have been affected by Botrytis cinerea (just the way Sauternes is).
                            THE WINE REGIONS

Here are thumbnail sketches of Australia’s major wine states and some of the best-known
wine regions within them. Remember that for multiregional blends labeled South Eastern
Australia, the grapes will probably have come from disparate regions, possibly quite far
apart. For such wines, the most important guide to quality is the producer’s name.

SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ADELAIDE HILLS | BAROSSA VALLEY | EDEN VALLEY | CLARE VALLEY | MCLAREN VALE |
COONAWARRA

South Australia is the driest state in Australia (which is the driest continent). More than
half of all Australian wine is produced in this state, including many of the country’s best
cabernet sauvignons, shirazes, chardonnays, rieslings, and sémillons.
    The wine regions of South Australia span out from the city of Adelaide. Among the top
regions are Adelaide Hills, Barossa Valley, Eden Valley, Clare Valley, McLaren Vale, and
Coonawarra. These districts were founded by men whose names have become
synonymous with Australian wine: Hamilton, Seppelt, Penfold, and so on. And today, a
Who’s Who of large Australian wine companies is located here, including Hardys,
Penfolds, Peter Lehmann, Seppeltsfield, Wolf Blass, Wynns, and Yalumba. But the region
is also a hotbed of small and medium-size avant-garde producers such as Henschke, Jim
Barry, Grosset, Torbreck, Shaw & Smith, and Tim Adams.
   A cool-climate region just east of the city of Adelaide, the Adelaide Hills is one of the
largest geographical regions in Australia, and one of the most diverse. A wide range of
grape varieties—everything from riesling, sauvignon blanc, and chardonnay to shiraz and
cabernet sauvignon—grows here. Viticulture in the Adelaide Hills began in the 1840s, but
a modern industry took hold only after the 1970s.
                    SOUTHERN COMFORT–SORT OF, MATE
 Many Australian wines are labeled South Australia or South Eastern Australia. Are these designations
 essentially the same? The answer is no. In fact, they could not be more different. South Australia is one
 of the five Australian states. (These are comparable to states in the United States, although Australian
 states are much larger.) Within the state of South Australia are some of the country’s most famous wine
 regions, including the Barossa Valley (renowned for shiraz), the Clare Valley (remarkable for dry riesling),
 and Coonawarra (known for cabernet sauvignon). By contrast, South Eastern Australia is not a state, and
 in a sense, not a place. It’s a legal designation that means the wine in the bottle is a blend of wines made
 from grapes grown thousands of miles apart, often in three different states—New South Wales, Victoria,
 and South Australia. To give a New World analogy, a wine labeled South Eastern Australia is the rough
 equivalent of a wine hypothetically made from a blend of grapes grown in California, Oregon, Washington
 State, and Texas and then called “Western United States.” Not surprisingly, South Eastern Australia
 wines are often inexpensive wines meant for everyday drinking, while wines from South Australia are
 among the most expensive in the country.

    Eden Valley and Clare Valley are both known for exquisite rieslings, although both also
make very precise shirazes. Eden Valley (actually a plateau above the Barossa Valley) is
known for more floral, exotic, medium-bodied rieslings, while those of Clare Valley
(again, not a true valley, but an elevated plateau) are more citrusy, with driving acidity. It
is commonly assumed that the rieslings from these two areas are picked early to achieve
their dizzying crispness, but they are not. Rather, the regions’ extremely cold nights and
water-holding, limestone-laced soils are credited with preserving riesling’s backbone of
inherent acidity.
   In a blind tasting, the shirazes from McLaren Vale always seem relatively easy to pick
out, first for their powerful and ripe character but sleek structure, and second for their
dramatic lift of spiciness, black olive, menthol, and dark chocolate. Both Clarendon Hills’
Astralis Shiraz and d’Arenberg’s The Dead Arm Shiraz are perfect examples. The small
region, a mix of hills and valleys with ironstone and loamy clay soils, is just 22 miles (35
kilometers) south of Adelaide, on the Fleurieu Peninsula. It is bounded on the northwest
by the Onkaparinga River, and on the west by Gulf St. Vincent, giving at least some of the
vines a bit of cooling maritime influence, which may help account for the wine’s structure
and elegance. Grapes were first planted here in 1838, by John Reynell and Thomas Hardy,
who started Seaview and Hardy Wine Company, respectively. Shiraz accounts for more
than 50 percent of the wine made in McLaren Vale.
   Coonawarra (the name is Aboriginal for “honeysuckle”) is considered (along with
Western Australia’s Margaret River) one of the best places in the country for structured
cabernet sauvignons. The region, about 230 miles (370 kilometers) south of Adelaide, is a
cigar-shaped strip just 7.5 miles (12 kilometers) long and 1.2 miles (1.9 kilometers) wide
of terra rossa soil, porous reddish clay soil overlaying limestone. The climate, not
surprisingly, is maritime, like that of Bordeaux.

                                        THE ABORIGINES
    Many of Australia’s wine districts have Aboriginal names, such as Coonawarra (“honeysuckle”), Mudgee
    (“nest in the hills”), and Padthaway (“good water”). The Aborigines, Australia’s native inhabitants, are a
    distinct race that has no close affinity with any other people. They have lived in Australia for more than
    thirty thousand years and are the oldest race on earth today.

   I find these cabernets evocative of black currants, with a discernible note of something
green—not unripe green bell pepper, but rather a more sophisticated suggestion of
chaparral.
    But for all of the deserved excitement of the regions above, the best-known wine region
in the state of South Australia—indeed, perhaps the best-known wine region in all of
Australia—is the Barossa Valley. The wide, fertile valley is made up of biscuit-colored
rolling hills, with vineyards planted in the best sites, where the soils are laced with
ironstone, red clay, quartz, and limestone, and everywhere else, fields of corn, wheat,
barley, legumes, and orchards as far as the eye can see. Sheep meander in paddocks, and
the small hamlets are full of old stone cottages. The Barossa (as it is simply known) was
settled in the early 1800s by a handful of Englishmen, as well as a large Lutheran Silesian
community (Silesia, today part of Poland, was then part of Germany, and German is still
regularly spoken in the Barossa). The Silesians were an insular community of
hardworking, frugal farmers with a strong food culture. Baked, pickled, preserved, and
smoked foods were—and still are—local specialties, as evidenced by the hugely popular
Barossa Farmer’s Market and the annual dill gherkin and pickled onion championships.
   Great cabernet is made in the Barossa, and I’ve loved many grenaches and grenache
blends from here, as well as the superb Australian fortified tawnies made in the region.
But above all, the Barossa is known for shiraz—rich, sappy shiraz with a concentrated
core of vivid “berriness” overlaid by wild lavender, spice, brambly, and licorice notes. Yet,
for all their dramatic richness and bigness, the best Barossa shirazes also have a superb
structure, balance, and sense of precision.

NEW SOUTH WALES
HUNTER VALLEY

New South Wales is Australia’s second-leading state in wine production, after South
Australia. (A lot of this is very inexpensive wine.)
   The most famous wine district in the state is the relatively small Hunter Valley, 75
miles (120 kilometers) north of Australia’s oldest and largest city, Sydney. The Hunter
Valley was the first wine area in Australia, vineyards having been planted here at the
beginning of the nineteenth century by the country’s earliest European settlers. Around
1960, Penfolds moved to an area slightly north of the original vineyards, initiating the
distinction between what is now known as the Upper Hunter and the Lower Hunter.
   The whole Hunter Valley region is something of an anomaly. Being one of the most
northerly of Australia’s wine districts, it is closer to the equator and its weather patterns
are influenced by warm ocean currents coming from the tropics. As a result, it is very
warm and almost too humid for grapes. Nonetheless, and almost against all odds, several
top chardonnays and shirazes come from here.
   But if the Hunter Valley has an ace in the hole, it’s sémillon, a wine that starts out as
bracing, limey, white peppery, and as high in acid as wine gets. Drinking it is like being
slapped. But with age—five to ten years or more—something startling happens: The wine
turns into a honey pot of rich, nutty, buttery fruit. Great examples are found from Tyrrell’s,
McWilliam’s, Mount Pleasant, Hart & Hunter, Thomas Wines, and Brokenwood.

VICTORIA
BEECHWORTH | GEELONG | GLENROWAN | GOULBURN | VALLEY | GRAMPIANS | HEATHCOTE |
MACEDON RANGES | MORNINGTON PENINSULA | NAGAMBIE LAKES | PYRENEES | RUTHERGLEN |
SOUTH GIPPSLAND | SUNBURY | YARRA VALLEY

Just as northern California’s wine industry was jump-started by the gold rush of 1849, the
discovery of gold in Victoria, in 1851, paved the way for a fledgling wine industry in the
state. As Victoria’s economy and population boomed, the ambitions of vintners soared
every bit as high as those of the gold diggers. Eventually, as the supply of gold dwindled,
vintners were known to hire out-of-work miners to dig underground wine cellars.
   But when the gold ran out completely, Victoria’s fortunes began to spiral downward.
The picture grew especially gloomy for wineries as phylloxera, economic decline,
competitive wines from South Australia, and changing land use all took a toll. (As an
aside, while phylloxera did affect a small number of vineyards in Victoria, the country as a
whole has largely escaped the pest, and most vineyards are on their own roots rather than
grafted onto tolerant rootstock.) By the 1960s, Victoria’s wine industry was a shadow of
its former self. When the Australian wine industry as a whole began to take off in the
1970s and 1980s, however, a new period of growth ensued for the state.




                               Fermentation—a family affair at Torbreck.

   Of all of mainland Australia’s wine regions, Victoria is the smallest and most southern
(only the island of Tasmania, off the Victorian coast, is smaller and farther south). The
region includes more than 820 producers, spread over more than a dozen small wine
districts that fan out directly from the city of Melbourne.
   Victoria’s wine districts vary considerably in climate, terrain, and soil, thanks in part to
the Great Dividing Range, which cuts through Victoria, creating mountainous and hilly
terrain over more than a third of the state. Several of the most renowned wine districts—
the Yarra Valley, Geelong, and Mornington Peninsula, for example—are very close to the
sea and benefit from cool breezes that sweep in off the Great Southern Ocean. In these
cool areas, chardonnay and pinot noir grapes thrive. Farther inland, in slightly warmer
pockets like Beechworth, the chardonnays that are made can again be stellar, if richer
(Giaconda Estate’s fantastic chardonnay comes from here). Victoria is also known for
cabernet sauvignon and shiraz, with some producers—such as Yarra Yering and Mount
Mary—making delicious red blends.
   One of Victoria’s specialties is the captivating, sweet muscats and topaques made in
northeastern Victoria, in the district of Rutherglen, by producers such as Chambers
Rosewood Vineyards and Campbells Wines. Spellbinding and unctuous, these wines are
deliciously unique (see Stickies, page 835).
   Finally, Victoria has always been associated with sparkling wine because Seppelt, one
of Australia’s oldest and most important sparkling producers, is located in the district of
Grampians. And in 1986, the French house Moët & Chandon founded Chandon Australia
here in the Yarra Valley.
                                             TASMANIA
 Tasmania, the smallest state of the Commonwealth of Australia, is a triangular, mountainous island in the
 Southern Ocean, about 150 miles (240 kilometers) south of Victoria. With its mild, sunny, cool, maritime
 climate, the island is an up-and-coming wine region, known especially for its pinot noir, as well as
 chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, riesling, and sparkling wines. While most of its 160 wine producers are
 small, winemaking here has exploded, especially in the past decade. From a mere 100 acres (40
 hectares) of vines in the 1950s, Tasmania now has some 3,700 acres (1,500 hectares) of vineyards.
    Tasmania (or “Tazzy,” as it is often called locally) is named for the Dutch explorer Abel Tasman, who
 discovered it in 1642. The island’s vast array of plant and animal life includes the Tasmanian devil, a not
 very devilish, doglike creature, which, like the kangaroo, is a marsupial.



WESTERN AUSTRALIA
MARGARET RIVER | GREAT SOUTHERN REGION | PEMBERTON | PERTH HILLS | SWAN VALLEY

Far on the other side of the Australian continent, 3,000 miles (4,800 kilometers) away
from the power centers of winemaking in the southeast, is the remote state of Western
Australia. The first known sighting of the western coastline was in 1622, by the Dutch
vessel Leeuwin, meaning “lioness.” The name would later be adopted by one of the state’s
most prominent wineries.
   Western Australia’s several wine districts, which include Margaret River, Great
Southern Region, Pemberton, Perth Hills, and Swan Valley, stretch out from the coastal
city of Perth. Vines were planted in this area in 1829, some years before the first plantings
in either South Australia or Victoria. But the state’s isolation and limited population
hampered the industry’s growth and scope until the 1980s.
    The Swan Valley, north of Perth, was Western Australia’s first wine district. It became
known for table grapes as well as wine grapes, and the leading wines were mostly sweet
and/or fortified, and were sold in bulk. It was here that Houghton White Burgundy, once
Australia’s most recognized white wine, was born in the years just before World War II.
Although it is slightly more polished now (and renamed Houghton White Classic), it was
originally a rustic, powerfully alcoholic wine made from chenin blanc, muscadelle, and
chardonnay. Amazingly, the Swan Valley is also where the Portuguese grape verdelho was
planted—almost two centuries ago, in 1829. It was brought by one of Western Australia’s
first colonists, a botanist named Thomas Waters, who took cuttings from the island of
Madeira, off the African coast (a stopping point to pick up provisions on the long voyage
out). Among the best verdelhos to try are Ashbrook Estate, Chestnut Grove, and Capel
Vale.
    The Margaret River wine region, where the cold Southern Ocean and the warm Indian Ocean splash together.

   Take a three-hour bus ride south from Perth, and you’ll come to the corner where the
great, warm Indian Ocean and the cold Southern Ocean collide. This is where you’ll find
the most renowned and ambitious of all the Western Australian districts: Margaret River.
Originally known for its timber, Margaret River is one of the world’s newer fine wine
regions. Vines weren’t planted here until the late 1960s, more than a century after grapes
were planted in the Napa Valley, for example. The region is still extremely remote and is
best known for its hypnotic giant waves. (Many of the local winery staff surf daily before
work.)
   One of the key pioneers of the Margaret River region was David Hohnen, a modest but
smart farmer who moved to California briefly to learn winemaking, then cobbled together
bank loans to found Cape Mentelle winery in 1970. (The prescient Hohnen is also credited
with being one of the first to recognize the potential of Marlborough, in New Zealand; he
founded Cloudy Bay there in 1983.)
   Given Margaret River’s maritime location and gravelly soils, Hohnen and several other
pioneers focused not on shiraz, but on Bordeaux varieties. Today, the region is considered
something of a “little Bordeaux” for the loveliness of its sémillon/sauvignon blanc blends
and the structure and elegance of the cabernet sauvignons—especially those from the
leading wineries, among them the aforementioned Cape Mentelle, plus Leeuwin Estate
and Vasse Felix.
    All of this said, chardonnay, too, has an almost magical affinity for the region. Leeuwin
Estate, in particular, makes its Art Series Chardonnays—wines of depth that with several
years’ aging grow even richer and more expansive. They are among the best produced in
all of Australia.
   Despite a nearly ideal sunny/ocean-cooled climate in Margaret River, there is one huge
problem: birds. As harvest approaches and the grapes begin their final push toward
ripeness, each row of vines must be netted. Before netting was used, three crops out of
five would be lost because the grapes would be eaten by the omnivorous birds called
silvereyes. Finally, in addition to Margaret River, the cool subdistricts within the Great
Southern Region are generating excitement. Wineries to watch here include Howard Park,
Houghton, and Plantagenet.
  SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF AUSTRALIAN SHIRAZ AND SHIRAZ
                           BLENDS
  Several of the following producers make wines at many price levels. Their top shiraz or shiraz blends are
                                       their most expensive wines.
  Charles Melton • Clarendon Hills • Clonakilla • Craiglee • d’Arenberg • Giaconda • Grant Burge • Hardys •
 Henschke • Jasper Hill • Jim Barry • Kilikanoon • Leasingham • Mitchelton • Mount Langi Ghiran • Ngeringa
 • Noon • Penfolds • Peter Lehmann • S.C. Pannell • Shaw & Smith • St. Hallett • Torbreck • Tyrrell’s • Vasse
                            Felix • Wendouree • Wynns • Yabby Lake • Yalumba


                           WHEN YOU VISIT… AUSTRALIA
          AUSTRALIA’S WINERIES are generally well set up for visitors, and the larger wineries
          often have multiple facilities and attractions, including restaurants, galleries, concerts,
          and so forth. The small wineries are far more humble, but chances are you’ll have the
          opportunity to taste with the owners themselves.
          MANY WINERIES are within easy driving distance of Australia’s major cities: Sydney,
          Melbourne, Adelaide, and Perth. In each of these cities, there are a number of wine
          bars worth visiting to get you started on the right foot.
          WHEN YOU VISIT THE STATE of South Australia, don’t miss the extraordinary
          Seppeltsfield where, for a small fee, you can taste the wine of your birth year, going
          back to the early 1950s.
                        The Australian Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                                   TYRRELL’S
                       SÉMILLON | VAT 1 | HUNTER VALLEY, NEW SOUTH WALES
                                                  100% sémillon
Dry sémillon (or as the Australians write it, semillon) is one of Australia’s great treasures, and no winery is more
lauded for it than Tyrrell’s, which has made sémillons back to 1963 from a site memorably called Short Flat
Vineyard. When young, Tyrrell’s Vat 1 is like a flash of moonlight… a hauntingly stark, bright wine that’s racy,
limey, and needle-sharp on the palate. With time, however, the wine undergoes a magical transformation for which
it is famous. The edginess melts away to reveal a great white wine of beauty and strength—a wine evocative of
brioche, whipped butter, and cashews. In these older Tyrrell’s Vat 1 sémillons, the butteriness and vibrancy are like
oppositely charged molecules in total attraction.
                                                   GROSSET
                     RIESLING | POLISH HILL | CLARE VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                                                  100% riesling
Jeffrey Grosset is the patriarch of riesling in Australia… a man who has helped put Australian riesling on the
international map; a man who has spent his life exploring finesse in a wine country often better known for power.
The Grosset rieslings are spot-on for Clare Valley—sharp and vivid, with intense, citrusy notes, but a lightness of
being that defines them. With age, the wines take on richness, creaminess, plus brioche notes, and a weathered rock
character, but their vivacity and focus never leave.
                                                PEWSEY VALE
                   RIESLING | THE CONTOURS | EDEN VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                                                  100% riesling
The Contours is perhaps Australian riesling’s most sacred site. Planted in 1961, high up on the limestone-laced
Eden Valley plateau above the Barossa Valley, the undulating vineyard is planted on terraces contoured to the sway
of the hills, an early method of catching precious rainfall. Unlike most dry rieslings worldwide, The Contours is
released only after five-and-a-half years of aging, when it has taken on a lanolin-like texture, as well as the
mesmerizing and unusual aromas and flavors of marzipan, pistachio, Kaffir lime, and Danish pastry. This is one of
Australia’s most sophisticated whites and a must for riesling lovers.
                                               LEEUWIN ESTATE
              CHARDONNAY | ART SERIES | MARGARET RIVER, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
                                                100% chardonnay
Seemingly at the end of the world in far Western Australia, 3 miles from the Indian Ocean, Leeuwin Estate makes
extraordinary, age-worthy, rich chardonnays that, in top vintages, are suffused with complex and mysterious
nuances. Never heavy or ponderous, despite their intensity and concentration, these are chardonnays that, sip after
sip, draw you into them, revealing something new each time. Leeuwin’s Art Series wines (so called to distinguish
them from the regular Leeuwin wines) are blends of the top lots. Each year, labels for the Art Series are
commissioned from leading Australian artists.

                                                     REDS
                                                 HENSCHKE
                     SHIRAZ | HILL OF GRACE | EDEN VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                                                   100% shiraz
Year in and year out, Hill of Grace, as it is known, is one of Australia’s most voluptuous and impressive shirazes.
Named after a local church and made from vines that, amazingly, are over 130 years old, it is a rich, aromatic,
impossibly sensual wine suggestive of black raspberry, bitter chocolate, boysenberries, cedar, leather, and cigar
boxes. The density and power behind the wine is indelible. Vintages many decades old take on complex camphor
and cedar chest aromas, with deeply satisfying, savory umami flavors. Hill of Grace’s sister shiraz, Mount
Edelstone (these vines were planted in 1912), is equally captivating, with waves of exotic spices and plush fruit and
a long, peppery tail of a finish.
                                                    JIM BARRY
                      SHIRAZ | THE ARMAGH | CLARE VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                                                    100% shiraz
Pure hedonism in a bottle, The Armagh (named after a county in Northern Ireland) is a majestic and distinctive
wine—one that shocks you with its masculine force of dark rock, iron, and mineral flavors, then, the next minute,
spreads over the palate like velvet jam. In the middle is the kind of “corruption” only syrah is capable of: flavors
that swirl around the ideas of blood, hung game, cigars, and sweat. Jim Barry began his career in 1959, a
contemporary of Max Schubert at Penfolds. Today, the vineyards are cared for by Jim’s son, the feisty, irrepressible
Peter Barry, who has been known to tell if shiraz is ripe by sticking his balding pate between the vines and seeing
how quickly his head feels warm.




                                                    TORBRECK

                      SHIRAZ | THE LAIRD | BAROSSA VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                                                    100% shiraz
The world has many excellent fruity wines with notes of spice and minerals—but not many spicy/minerally wines
with notes of fruit. This is the latter—a masculine wine of incredible rockiness, angularity, firmness, and precision.
It’s the iron fist, with only the merest velvet glove. Torbreck (named after a forest in Scotland) was founded by the
indomitable, insatiable David Powell, a man who seems like he could stare down the end of a gun barrel… and
chuckle. The wine is aged in wood for three years, in special barrels made of staves 1.8 inches (45 millimeters)
thick (an average stave is only about half as thick—.87 to 1.1 inches (22 to 27 millimeters) and then never topped
up, since the thicker staves serve to inhibit evaporation. Unusual winemaking, but the proof is in the pudding.
                                               CHARLES MELTON
             SHIRAZ GRENACHE | NINE POPES | BAROSSA VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                     Approximately equal parts shiraz and grenache, with 5% mourvèdre
Nine Popes is an homage to Châteauneuf-du-Pape. The famous appellation in the Rhône Valley of France translates
as “new castle of the pope,” a reference to the time in the thirteenth century when the papacy was located here.
However, Charlie Melton’s French skills being modest, he thought the name meant “home of nine popes,” and
named his wine accordingly. The wine, intense and complex, proves just how riveting Rhône-style blends can be in
Australia. Lashings of leather, tar, and espresso-like bitterness hit the palate in between herb-scented notes of wild
lavender and thyme, salty notes of minerals, and fruit flavors that are more blue (blueberry) than red (cherry).
Today, Charlie Melton is considered one of the protectors of old-vine Rhône varieties in the Barossa.




                                                  KILIKANOON

                     SHIRAZ | ATTUNGA 1865 | CLARE VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                                                    100% shiraz
It’s hard to choose a Kilikanoon wine to write about, as the winery makes killer riesling and grenache in addition to
several extraordinary shirazes. Attunga shiraz (the word means “high place” in the Aboriginal language) won out
for its sublimeness. Made only in extraordinary years, the wine comes from a low-yielding, old vineyard just 2.5
acres (1 hectare) in size. Lushly textured but not immediately effusive, Attunga is a shiraz that reveals its menthol
character slowly on the palate. And that choreography sneaks up on you as it can only in great wines.
                                                   PENFOLDS
                                        GRANGE | SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                       Mostly shiraz, occasionally with a tiny bit of cabernet sauvignon
Grange is widely considered to be Australia’s most famous shiraz and the country’s most famous wine, comparable
in status to a First Growth Bordeaux. A wine of exquisite balance, it embodies power and elegance simultaneously.
When the wine is young, the texture is velvet-on-velvet, and the lush berry flavors are infused with vanilla (thanks
to long aging in American oak). With time, Grange becomes deliriously supple, with aromas and flavors suggestive
of violets, black figs, cedar, and spices. Grange has one of the longest track records when it comes to long aging.
Wines from the 1950s, made by the master winemaker Max Schubert, are still in amazing condition.

                                  FORTIFIED SWEET WINES
                                      CHAMBERS ROSEWOOD
                    TOPAQUE MUSCADELLE | CLASSIC | RUTHERGLEN, VICTORIA
                                                100% muscadelle
In a tasting of Rutherglen topaques not long ago, I was tempted—maybe compelled—to score the wines. They were
so good, so distinctive, so unique, so emotion-inducing. I wrote 100 repeatedly. Chambers (as it’s usually simply
known) was one of those 100-point wines—a wine that has a plumb line deep into figs, chocolate, and molasses.
The texture was unreal… like some ethereal combination of honey and melted chocolate. Most remarkable of all,
despite its luxuriousness, the wine was alive with energy, and very vivid on the palate.




                                                SEPPELTSFIELD
          PARA | AUSTRALIAN FORTIFIED TAWNY | BAROSSA VALLEY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
                  Matro (mourvèdre), shiraz, grenache, in varying combinations each year
Each year, tiny amounts of this mind-blowing wine are released when the wine is a century old (in 2010, the 1910
was released; in 2012, the 1912 was released, and so on). And the wine is a steal (in 2012, the small, 3- to 4-
ounce/100-milliliter bottle of the 1912 Para cost $300—a bargain given its age). The complexity of Para is
astounding. The wine’s flavors seem to spread through your body like a hypnotic drug. And what flavors! Surges of
sweet licorice, molten chocolate cake, dried fruit soaked in liqueur, molasses, citrus peel, anise, toffee, bark, and
peat. Wines like this have no reference point. They are simply plunges into a netherworld of sensory pleasure.
Seppeltsfield has made Para since 1878. The name Para refers to a small river in the Barossa Valley.
                                                         NEW ZEALAND

NEW ZEALAND RANKS FOURTEENTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. NEW
ZEALANDERS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 4 GALLONS (14 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Located roughly midway between the equator and the South Pole, New Zealand lies
isolated in the middle of the South Pacific Ocean. The nearest landmass, Australia, is
1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers) to the northwest. The country is composed of two long
main islands, called simply the North Island and the South Island, plus numerous small
off-shore islands. New Zealand’s vineyards are the southernmost in the world. They are
also the first vineyards on earth to see the sun each day, thanks to New Zealand’s location
close to the International Date Line.
    In the 1970s, when so many wine-producing countries were moving toward modern
wine industries, New Zealand was still far better known for lamb than wine (indeed, the
country had more sheep than people at the time). Then, in the mid-1980s, and almost
against all odds, one wine rose to extraordinary fame—Cloudy Bay Sauvignon Blanc. The
first few vintages put the whole of New Zealand on the international wine map. It was the
first time a single wine had ever had such impact—a feat made even more surprising by
the fact that sauvignon blanc was, at the time, considered something of a second-string
variety. But Cloudy Bay’s sauvignon blanc was startlingly different. It rocked the wine
world by opening the door to a whole new galaxy of flavor. Every adventurous wine
drinker in the world had to taste it because it expanded the known realm of what wine
could taste like. Since that time, countless wine drinkers have had the same oh-my-god
experience with other New Zealand sauvignon blancs. The wines are, quite simply,
outrageousness in a bottle. And they’ve flung the door wide open to other exciting New
Zealand varietals—especially pinot noir.

      “New Zealand is the youngest nation in the world, both geologically and in
      terms of human settlement. It’s four million people, still wandering around in
      dazed wonder at its beauty, still trying to figure out what they want to do with
      it all.”
                                                            — NIGEL GREENING,
                                                            proprietor of Felton Road

    The remote islands of New Zealand were unknown to the western world until Abel
Tasman, the Dutch sea captain after whom Tasmania was named, landed on the northern
tip of the South Island in 1642. There, Tasman encountered a violent group of native
peoples—the Maori—and promptly left. More than a century would pass before the next
westerner ventured onto New Zealand’s shores. In 1769, the English explorer Captain
James Cook circumnavigated the islands. His explorations resulted in the British
colonization of New Zealand, and in the bond between the two countries that still exists
today.
   Almost fifty years later, in 1819, the first New Zealand vines were planted by an
Anglican missionary named Samuel Marsden, although there is no record of wine being
produced from the grapes. Then, in 1839, Scotsman James Busby successfully made the
country’s first wines. Both Marsden and Busby had written of New Zealand’s promise as a
wine producer, for the climate and terrain appeared exceptionally well suited to
grapevines.

                       THE QUICK SIP ON NEW ZEALAND
         NEW ZEALAND is best known for its racy, vibrant sauvignon blancs and earthy, elegant
         pinot noirs.
         NEW ZEALAND’S wine industry, while growing and infused with excitement, remains
         tiny by global standards. Wine production here accounts for less than 1 percent of the
         world’s total.
         ONE OF THE COOLEST maritime wine regions in the New World, New Zealand boasts
         vineyards that are the most southerly on the globe.

   Despite this auspicious beginning, it would be a century and a half before a solid wine
industry would take hold. From the 1840s to the 1980s, the obstacles to success were
pervasive. To begin with, many of the pioneering New Zealand winemakers were English
immigrants who had no history or experience with grape-growing. To make matters
worse, for decades before and after the turn of the twentieth century, New Zealand came
under the influence of a relentless temperance movement, which severely handicapped the
establishment of any sort of wine culture. For most of the 1800s, wineries could not sell
wine to consumers; they could only sell to hotels for banquets, and then only if certain
conditions were met. It wasn’t until after World War II that wine was permitted to be sold
by the bottle from wine shops, and selling wine in restaurants became legal only in the
1960s. Even then, there was a 10:00 p.m. cutoff after which no wine or alcohol could be
sold.
   None of this fully deterred the young country’s would-be winemakers. In the late
1800s, immigrants from the Dalmatian coast, now in Croatia, intending to make their
fortunes in New Zealand’s gum fields, eventually turned to farming and grape growing
instead. Although many of these immigrants were experienced winemakers, they were
powerless against oidium (powdery mildew) and phylloxera, which soon decimated their
young vineyards. In the wake of these diseases and the economic downturn that followed,
the industry turned for a time to hardy hybrid grapes and the production of poor-quality,
sugary, fortified concoctions roughly modeled on inferior brandy and ersatz Sherry.
           The snowcapped Kaikoura Ranges are a stunning backdrop for vineyards in Marlborough.

   Today, New Zealand is a vastly different place. The fine wine industry that began to
take hold in the mid-1980s has boomed. Between 1994 and 2013, for example, the number
of wineries skyrocketed from just thirty to over seven hundred. More recently, between
2003 and 2013, vineyard acreage doubled, and now stands at 88,300 acres (35,700
hectares). And despite a global financial crisis in the late 2000s, New Zealand’s wine
production grew by more than 50 percent in the four years between 2007 and 2011.
   New Zealand’s seven hundred wine producers range from tiny family operations to
large, global companies (Pernod Ricard, for example, owns several New Zealand brands,
including Brancott Estate and Church Road). While some producers do grow all their own
grapes, the majority of New Zealand wineries buy grapes from the country’s 833
independent grape growers. Increasingly, of course, these grape growers are making wine
and coming out with their own small brands.
    Of the twenty-five or so grape varieties grown in New Zealand today, sauvignon blanc
and pinot noir are the most renowned and, respectively, the most widely planted. While
it’s true that 78 percent of the vineyards are planted with white grape varieties (primarily
sauvignon blanc), pinot noir has had a stellar rise to fame in this country. In addition, pinot
gris and riesling (the latter, both as a dry wine and as a late-harvest dessert wine) are
creating a great deal of excitement, especially on the South Island, in Marlborough and
Canterbury/Waipara Valley.
  For an explanation of New Zealand’s wine laws, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page
928.
   THE MOST IMPORTANT NEW ZEALAND WINES
                             LEADING WINES
CHARDONNAY white
PINOT GRIS white
PINOT NOIR red
RIESLING white (dry and sweet)
SAUVIGNON BLANC white
SPARKLING WINES white and rosé

                             WINES OF NOTE
CABERNET SAUVIGNON and BORDEAUX-STYLE BLENDS red
GEWÜRZTRAMINER white
SYRAH red
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

The factor that most influences New Zealand’s grapes, and hence its wines, is the coolness
of the climate. New Zealand has some of the coolest maritime wine regions in the New
World. Because of the long, narrow shape of the two main islands, no vineyard is more
than 80 miles (130 kilometers) from the sea. This cool, steady climate allows the grapes to
ripen evenly and gently over the course of a long growing season, culminating in a harvest
that can take place anytime from March to May (this is, after all, the Southern
Hemisphere). In the best of circumstances, the length of the growing season can lead to
elegant wines with wonderfully pure flavors. It’s often said that New Zealand vegetables
and fruits, including grapes, have an intensity of flavor rarely found in produce grown
elsewhere. Of course, a cool climate also means that, generally speaking, the grapes boast
a good amount of natural acidity. For the best New Zealand whites, this can translate into
a dazzling sense of crispness.
                          THE GRAPES OF NEW ZEALAND
                                               WHITES
 CHARDONNAY: The third-most widely planted grape in New Zealand, chardonnay is a source of wines
 of character. The wines can be found in a variety of styles, from lush to lean and Chablis-like. Also used
 for sparkling wine.
 GEWÜRZTRAMINER: While acreage is still small, gewürztraminer shows considerable promise here.
 PINOT GRIS: An important variety creating lots of excitement. Plantings have multiplied more than
 sixfold in the past decade.
 RIESLING: An up-and-coming variety with lots of promise. It can make delicious dry wines and
 sensational botrytized dessert wines.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: The grape that focused world attention on New Zealand wines, sauvignon blanc
 makes outrageously good wines with full-throttle green and lightly tropical fruit flavors.

                                                 REDS
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Planted in the warmest pockets around the country and often blended with
 merlot and other varieties to make Bordeaux-style blends. Plantings are in decline as cool-climate
 varieties like pinot noir move ahead.
 MERLOT: Almost always blended with cabernet sauvignon.
 PINOT NOIR: The most widely planted red grape in New Zealand, and the country’s red specialty. Pinot
 noir can make delicious, earthy, still wines; it is also used for sparkling wines.
 SYRAH: A minor but potentially important grape, viewed as having significant potential.

    All of this said, New Zealand is not without viticultural hurdles. Principal among these
is rain. In the past, rainy weather often led to moldy grape bunches, dense vine canopies,
and wines that tasted like stewed green vegetables. In the 1980s, however, top
viticulturists—including the internationally famous Australian Dr. Richard Smart—
developed trellising systems and viticultural techniques that help promote ripeness and
maturity. In New Zealand, such techniques led to a whole different sort of green character
—a ripe, complex, fresh green flavor rather than a vegetative one. Needless to say, many
of these techniques have been copied around the world and are used to grow numerous
different grape varieties.
    New Zealand’s two main islands stretch more than 900 miles (1,400 kilometers) in
length. Both islands boast extensive and beautiful mountain ranges (the glacier-laced
Southern Alps, with twenty-three peaks that are more than 10,000 feet/3,000 meters in
height, are located here). But the mountain slopes are so steep and erosion is such a
problem that the country’s vineyards are mostly planted on flat plains or gently rolling
hills. Soil varies considerably, from clays interspersed with particles of volcanic rock to
fertile river-basin types. Such diversity is the result of New Zealand’s tumultuous geologic
past. The country lies at the active juncture of two of the world’s great tectonic plates, the
Indo-Australian Plate and the Pacific Plate.
   On New Zealand’s North Island, two of the largest and most important wine districts
are Gisborne and Hawke’s Bay. Gisborne, near the International Date Line and the small,
easternmost landmass in the country (an area known as the East Cape), is the site of the
world’s easternmost grapes and is known for numerous tasty chardonnays, often with light
honey and tropical fruit flavors. Hawke’s Bay is the second largest wine region in the
country and is considered one of the best. Its complex and varied soil patterns allow for
many types of vines to thrive here. Gimblett Gravels, an area within Hawke’s Bay, is
particularly known for producing high-quality merlot, syrah, cabernet franc, and cabernet
sauvignon. (The wine known as Dada 2, which is made from these varieties, is stunning.)
Gimblett Gravels soil, called Omahu soil, was deposited in the area by the Ngaruroro
River, and its layers of sand and stony gravel drain water well, creating ideal growing
conditions for these red varieties. Additionally, merlot, syrah, and cabernet sauvignon
thrive in warm summer weather, and by virtue of its long hours of sunshine, Hawke’s Bay
is one of the warmer regions in New Zealand. I’m sure that if I was poured blind the sleek
Mission Estate Reserve Cabernet Sauvignon, with its fine cassis and tobacco aromas and
flavors, I’d think I was drinking good Bordeaux.




Cloudy Bay, one of the wineries that put New Zealand on the international map, is known for sauvignon blanc and pinot
                                                        noir.

   The third major wine district on the North Island is often simply called Auckland,
although what is really meant is the territory around Auckland, New Zealand’s largest city.
Far smaller than Gisborne or Hawke’s Bay in terms of wine production and vineyard
acreage, Auckland nonetheless boasts the greatest number of wineries. Many of New
Zealand’s top wine companies are headquartered here, even though their vineyards are
located elsewhere in the country. And there are several first-rate small family producers,
such as Kumeu River. Auckland encompasses a handful of smaller, well-known wine
districts, including Kumeu/Huapai, Henderson, and Waiheke Island. Because the
Auckland area is somewhat warmer than other districts, the focus here is chardonnay and
Bordeaux blends.
                                               THE MAORI
 New Zealand was originally inhabited by the Maori, a Polynesian people who, over centuries, migrated
 from subtropical Pacific islands. The Maori developed a concept called kaitiakitanga, which means
 “guardianship.” When westerners arrived in large numbers at the end of the eighteenth century, they
 quickly adopted the Maori way of thinking. Today, one-third of the island nation’s land is owned by the
 government and protected against development.
    Although the Maori had no written language, Christian missionaries in the nineteenth century recorded
 the words the Maori spoke. Today, many towns, wineries, and even vineyards have Maori names. The
 Maori name for New Zealand, Aotearoa, means “land of the long white cloud.”




           In Central Otago, pinot noir vines are covered in nets to prevent birds from eating the grapes.

   Finally, in the southeast corner of the North Island, relatively near New Zealand’s
capital, Wellington, is the small wine region Wairarapa/Martinborough. The two dozen or
so high-quality producers here make a variety of good wines. However, their most
noteworthy—and hard-won—successes have been with pinot noir. In just a few short
years, Ata Rangi, Martinborough Vineyard, Dry River, Schubert Wines, Craggy Range,
and others have produced remarkable pinot noirs with international reputations.
   Compared to the North Island, the South Island is even cooler and was very rural until
relatively recently. There were no commercial vineyards on the South Island until 1973. In
that year, the company known as Montana Wines planted vines in Marlborough, on the
northeastern tip of the South Island, and pioneered what was to become the most
prestigious wine district in the country (in 2005, Montana Wines was absorbed into the
large French conglomerate Pernod Ricard and renamed Brancott Estate). Today, more than
60 percent of all New Zealand vineyards are in Marlborough alone, and the region
produces 70 percent of all New Zealand wine and 80 percent of all New Zealand
sauvignon blanc. Indeed, Marlborough is quintessential sauvignon blanc territory, as wines
from wineries like Cloudy Bay, Greywacke, Wairau River, and Villa Maria demonstrate.
Yet, fantastic pinot gris and riesling are also on the rise here (Forrest’s botrytized riesling
is a beautiful wine), and Marlborough is also one of the country’s main regions for top
pinot noir (more on this in a moment).
   Other wine districts on the South Island include Nelson, a small but beautiful wine
region about 40 miles (64 kilometers) west of Marlborough, and Canterbury, a cool region
midway down the length of the island. But the most southerly and important of all is
Central Otago, a small region within Otago that, in Maori, means “place of red earth,”
referring to the region’s ocher-colored soils. It was here that New Zealand’s Gold Rush
occurred in the 1850s, but today Central Otago is best known as one of the hubs of great
pinot noir in New Zealand, and is home to such wineries as Felton Road, Burn Cottage,
and Amisfield.




SAUVIGNON BLANC
If any grape is central to New Zealand’s wine identity, it’s sauvignon blanc, now the
leading variety in the country and the wine that dominates exports. New Zealand
sauvignon blancs have no parallel anywhere in the world. Explosive yet taut, they evoke a
spectrum of fresh greens: limes, wild herbs, watercress, gooseberries, green olives, green
figs, green tea, green melons, plus a host of green vegetables from snow peas to green
beans. (So ubiquitous are these flavors that one might well wonder if some Narnia-like
green netherworld exists under New Zealand.)

                                          THE OTHER KIWI
    Because of New Zealand’s prolonged isolation, which lasted until the eighteenth century, it has both
    unusual vegetation and a high proportion of species found nowhere else. The only native mammals, for
    example, are two species of bats. In the absence of predatory mammals, New Zealand became home to
    several rare species of flightless birds. One of these, the kiwi (about the size of a large hen), is also the
    nickname for a New Zealander.

   But, of course, greenness is a double-edged sword. Green can also be gawky, acrid, and
vegetal, and come at you like an assault rifle firing asparagus. For the top estates, the key
has been to harness sauvignon’s freshness and zing but leave out any strident, raw, unripe
flavors. And greenness isn’t the whole story. New Zealand sauvignons also have an exotic
tropical backdrop. They often hint at mango, papaya, or passion fruit. The combination
can be dynamite, making for untamed, unleashed wines that are true to their name—
sauvignon, from the French sauvage, means “wild.”
   Finally, two notes on how New Zealand sauvignon blancs are made. First, most are
fermented in stainless steel so that their green/tropical flavors don’t get bogged down by
oak. That said, some estates now ferment a tiny portion of the wine in older oak barrels
and blend that portion back in, to give the wine a subtle sense of roundness. And second,
the top New Zealand sauvignon blancs are dry. It’s something of a desperate move (and a
cheap trick) to try to mask unripe, vegetal wine by leaving residual sugar in it.
                                    THE GUMBOOT CLONE
 The Gumboot Clone (gum-boot is the New Zealand term for a rain boot), also known as the Abel Clone,
 is the Kiwis’ secret weapon for rich, balanced pinot noir, but it is also a story of intrigue. As it goes, in the
 1970s a New Zealand rugby player returning from France tried to sneak pinot noir cuttings into the
 country in his rain boot (in which case he must have had huge feet). The rumor is that they were cuttings
 from the Domaine de la Romanée-Conti, in Burgundy. The plants were found by a fastidious customs
 agent named Malcolm Abel, who also just happened to be a grape grower in Auckland. Abel suspected
 he might have something of real value, and after passing them through customs and quarantine, he
 planted the cuttings in his vineyards (we can’t vouch for the legality of all this), and shared them with his
 friend Clive Paton, of Ata Rangi. Abel passed away shortly afterward, but Paton continued to grow the
 Abel Clone and began turning out stunning pinot noirs. The clone eventually spread across the country,
 and now accounts for some of the best pinot noirs in New Zealand.


PINOT NOIR
As mentioned, pinot noir has proven hugely successful in New Zealand, and in a very
short period of time. (Plantings of pinot doubled in the decade between 2003 and 2013.)
Indeed, winemakers at top estates like Cloudy Bay, Ata Rangi, and Dry River began
experimenting with pinot noir clones only as of the late 1980s, and pinot noir represents
such a new phenomenon in New Zealand that growers and winemakers are still
discovering the best sites to plant vineyards and the best methods for winemaking.
   New Zealand pinot noir is planted throughout the entire country, but the lion’s share is
grown on the South Island. Almost half of this is grown in Marlborough alone, and a
significant amount of the rest comes from Central Otago, in the far southern part of the
South Island. In general, Marlborough pinot noirs appear to be the fruitier of the two, with
nuanced red fruit flavors. They are often used to make sparkling wines, which are very
popular in New Zealand, although not often exported. Central Otago pinot noirs, on the
other hand, often display an earthiness and wild herb character, which places them
stylistically between Old World and New World pinot noirs.
    On the North Island (at the southern tip), the small region of Martinborough also
produces stellar pinot noirs whose concentration and depth can be spellbinding. After a
1978 New Zealand government report found the soils of Martinborough to be very similar
to the soils of Burgundy, a rush to plant pinot noir vines swept the region, and it now
produces some of the best pinot noirs in New Zealand.
 SOME OF THE BEST PRODUCERS OF NEW ZEALAND SAUVIGNON BLANC
Astrolabe • Ata Rangi • Auntsfield • Brancott • Clos Henri • Cloudy Bay • Craggy Range • Dada • Dog Point
  • Giesen • Greywacke • Mahi • Man O’ War • Martinborough Vineyard • Misha’s Vineyard • Mud House
 Wines • Neudorf • Palliser Estate • Pegasus Bay • Saint Clair • Seresin Marama • Spy Valley • Te Mata •
                                  Villa Maria • Wairau River • Wither Hills
                                     MUTTON NO MORE
Once known culinarily as the land of lamb and little else, New Zealand now boasts some of the most
exciting food in the Pacific. Auckland alone has dozens of wildly creative restaurants where the dramatic,
boldly seasoned dishes are a spin on European ideas infused with the complex flavors of Southeast
Asia, Polynesia, and the South Pacific islands. And on every restaurant table, it seems, is a bottle of New
Zealand wine. But then, not just any wine will work when it comes to dishes uninhibitedly laced with
chiles, lime, and tropical fruits. What do work are New Zealand’s burstingly fresh pinot gris and rieslings,
and the country’s racy, herbal, tropical sauvignon blancs.



                       WHEN YOU VISIT… NEW ZEALAND
         NEW ZEALAND’S WINERIES and vineyards are often surrounded by beautifully
         pastoral rolling hills, majestic mountains, and unspoiled coastlines. Don’t miss one of
         the country’s most breathtaking features, the Southern Alps on the South Island, with
         twenty-three peaks that are more than 10,000 feet (3,000 meters) in height, including
         Mount Cook.
         MOST NEW ZEALAND WINERIES—small and large—are well set up for tours and
         tastings, and a number of wineries have restaurants and picnic facilities.
                    The New Zealand Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                               GREYWACKE
                                   SAUVIGNON BLANC | MARLBOROUGH
                                              100% sauvignon blanc
New Zealand sauvignon blanc is never about delayed gratification. It generally comes hurtling at you, arms wide
open. But Kevin Judd’s Greywacke sauvignon blanc is, like his pinot noir, a very sophisticated wine. It starts out
with intriguing, spicy green notes reminiscent of baby arugula, then moves to mango, then to something deep and
foresty. The texture, meanwhile, is alive, bouncy and brisk, and the finish lingers for a long while (a rarity with
sauvignon blanc). In summer especially, I could drink this all day long.
                                                  CLOUDY BAY

                                   SAUVIGNON BLANC | MARLBOROUGH
                                              100% sauvignon blanc
When Cloudy Bay Sauvignon Blanc was first released in 1985, it became an overnight sensation and, for the first
time, focused world attention on the wines of New Zealand. The wine is a torpedo of intensity. Lime zest, newly
mown grass, green tea, grapefruit, mint, wheatgrass, seawater, green peppercorns, caraway, and a flurry of exotic
green flavors go off like grenades in your mouth. But it is not the green explosion that makes Cloudy Bay so
compelling. It’s the way all of these flavors are intricately woven together to create a complex, round, mouthfilling
wine with a sophisticated, long finish. Cloudy Bay was founded in 1985 by David Hohnen (who, earlier, had
founded Western Australia’s Cape Mentelle winery), and today it is owned by Moët Hennessy-Louis Vuitton.
                                                 WAIRAU RIVER

                                   SAUVIGNON BLANC | MARLBOROUGH
                                              100% sauvignon blanc
The Wairau River sauvignons are often seized tight when you first open them, but then their spring-loaded acidity
and wild flavors burst on the scene and everything gets fascinating. I love this wine’s ocean-fresh saline/briny
aromas, and the pithy, spicy “bite” of peppery greens like arugula, dandelion leaf, and tomato leaf. Lest the
sophisticated, salty/bitter flavors get too much, there’s also a beautiful richness here, as if someone drizzled lemon
crème anglaise over everything. Wairau River was founded in 1978 by Phil and Chris Rose, who run the estate with
their children today.




                                                   MUD HOUSE
                 SAUVIGNON BLANC | THE WOOLSHED VINEYARD | MARLBOROUGH
                                              100% sauvignon blanc
Named after the shed where wool was stored on the sheep farm that occupied the land before Mud House purchased
it in 2002, the Woolshed Vineyard sauvignon blanc is saturated with tropical fruit flavors—pear, passion fruit,
melon, and lime—and a luscious texture. A clean, linear thread of acidity keeps the wine fresh and lively, and a hint
of herbaceousness arrives at the last minute, delivering that classic Marlborough greenness in the form of thyme
and green tea. Founded in 1996, Mud House is owned by the Australian-based wine group Accolade.
                                                   VILLA MARIA
                       DRY RIESLING | ESTATE CELLAR SELECT | MARLBOROUGH
                                                    100% riesling
Villa Maria, founded in 1961 by Sir George Fistonich, was one of the early, pioneering wineries in New Zealand
and, for many wine drinkers, their well-known and widely praised sauvignon blanc has been an initiation into “New
Zealand flavor.” But I have decided to write about their cutting-edge dry riesling, for it demonstrates the beauty this
variety can achieve in New Zealand. Flashy and vibrant, the wine has lovely notes of apricots, peaches, yellow
fruits, and citrus. It’s cleansing and brisk, with a cool mineral finish that makes it a perfect counterpoint to many
foods, but bold-flavored dishes like spicy Southeast Asian crab or pad thai with lots of mint are especially terrific
matches.




                                                  KUMEU RIVER
                                             CHARDONNAY | KUMEU
                                                  100% chardonnay
Year in and year out, Kumeu River makes two of the most impressive chardonnays in New Zealand—the “regular”
Kumeu River and the vineyard-designated Maté’s Vineyard. Both are fascinatingly distinctive and artisanal, and
seem to have more in common with white Burgundies than with other New World chardonnays. The regular Kumeu
is rich, leesy, and nutty, and has an earthy/salty character. A vibrant line of acidity holds it all together so that the
wine tastes both rich and elegant. The Maté’s Vineyard is the more powerful and the more expensive. Kumeu River
is owned by the Brajkovich family, which came to New Zealand from Croatia in 1937. Winemaker Michael
Brajkovich was also New Zealand’s first Master of Wine.

                                                       REDS
                                                 ATA RANGI
                                      PINOT NOIR | MARTINBOROUGH
                                                 100% pinot noir
My tasting notes on Ata Rangi’s pinot noirs always include the word beautiful. “Beautiful harmony.” “Beautiful
spiced tea flavors.” “Beautiful silky texture.” Beauty is indeed a concept that reverberates through these lovely
pinots, which draw you in with their pure cranberry/raspberry flavors and the soft echo of something earthy. Ata
Rangi (the name in the Maori language means “dawn sky” or “new beginning”) was founded in 1980 by Clive
Paton, a former cattle farmer. To make ends meet when the vines were young (and not yet producing grapes), Paton
sold pumpkins and garlic, which he grew between the rows until the new vines began producing the quality fruit
that has made Ata Rangi one of the best pinot producers in New Zealand.




                                                  GREYWACKE
                                        PINOT NOIR | MARLBOROUGH
                                                 100% pinot noir
In 2009, Kevin Judd, the super-talented original winemaker for Cloudy Bay, started his own brand, Greywacke
(named for the round greywacke river stones found in the soil). The man has a golden touch. It takes years of
experience to get pinot noir right, but Judd’s Greywacke is dead-on—a complex, spicy, earthy, cranberry-scented
pinot noir with an underlying quiet freshness that pinot noir holds onto in cool climates. The wine’s delicacy and
arc of flavor are simply beautiful.
                                                 CRAGGY RANGE
                      PINOT NOIR | TE MUNA ROAD VINEYARD | MARTINBOROUGH
                                                   100% pinot noir
Ripe cherry and spiced cranberry aromas pull you in, but it’s the delicious wave of black cherry, raspberry, bitter
earth, and white pepper flavors in Craggy Range’s Te Muna pinot noir that take over your senses (te muna, in
Maori, means “the secret”). The wine’s telltale earthiness and enticing spiciness are hallmarks of Martinborough,
but the richness of this wine is probably the result of the elevated terraces in the vineyard, which cause the vines to
struggle. Craggy Range was founded in 1997 by Terry Peabody, an American businessman, and Steve Smith, a
leading viticulturalist in New Zealand. In 1999, when the pair planted a vineyard off Te Muna Road, a local
Aboriginal woman named Aunt Sally buried a piece of the Peabody family’s silver in the vineyard as a good luck
omen. Nice move, Aunt Sally. Craggy Range also makes a stellar syrah called Le Sol from Gimblett Gravels, in
Hawke’s Bay.
                                                    DRY RIVER
                                       PINOT NOIR | MARTINBOROUGH
                                                  100% pinot noir
Quiet beauty can be very delicious. In top vintages, Dry River’s pinot noir opens with a gentle spicy aroma and a
fine spicy “frame” within which all sorts of delicious fruit flavors congregate—pomegranate, cranberry, vanilla.
These are the elegant clouds of flavor that form the core of Dry River’s exquisite, distinct pinot noir. Then there’s
that silken softness—a texture that pinot noir lovers around the world crave. Neil and Dawn McCallum planted
their first vineyard in 1979, and Dry Creek became one of the first wineries in Martinborough. It was also one of
the five pioneering wineries that defined and created the Martinborough Terrace appellation, based on the area’s
low rainfall and free-draining soils. This wine’s oxymoronic name comes from one of the first sheep stations in the
area, which was called Dry River and was later renamed Dyerville.




                                                  WILD EARTH

                                        PINOT NOIR | CENTRAL OTAGO
                                                  100% pinot noir
This is certainly a well-named wine, for Wild Earth’s pinot is full of delicious, wild, earthy aromas and flavors—
peat, bark, damp earth, and wild herbs. But against that background come other flavors… currants, cranberries,
raspberries, and spices (like an exotic Christmas cranberry sauce). And then, something leathery or gamy, almost
Rhône-like. When pinot noir takes you on a journey through different worlds of flavor, you know you are in the
midst of something complex, artisanal, and very captivating.
                                                                            CHILE

CHILE RANKS SIXTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. CHILEANS DRINK AN
AVERAGE OF 5 GALLONS (17 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Chile exists in near perfect seclusion. On the west is the Pacific Ocean; on the east, the
massive Andes Mountains; to the north, the Atacama Desert; and to the south, about 400
miles (640 kilometers) across the water, frozen masses of Antarctic ice. The country,
squeezed in between these barriers, is roughly 2,700 miles (4,300 kilometers) long, but at
its narrowest point, only 96 miles (155 kilometers) wide. Within these formidable natural
boundaries exists an almost Eden-like environment for grapes and other crops. The warm,
dry, brightly sunny days recall the Mediterranean. Irrigation is easy thanks to snow
melting on the Andes, which feeds roaring rivers, themselves the products of melting
ancient glaciers. And thanks to the country’s physical isolation, there are very few vine
diseases and pests, obviating the need for almost all sprays and chemical treatments. In
short, grape-growing conditions are so ideal, the cost of vineyard land and labor is so
reasonable, and serviceable wines are so easy to make that Chile has become one of the
world’s leading producers of value wines.

      “The beauty of great wine is revealed not by adding adornment, but by
      removing it.”
                                                    — ALEXANDRA MARNIER
                                                             LAPOSTOLLE,
                                                                 Lapostolle

   Those bargains have built an enviable export empire. From a negligible monetary value
in 1980 (when less than 2 percent of Chile’s wine production was exported), the value of
Chilean wine exports rose to $50 million in 1990, then a staggering $1.5 billion in 2010.
Indeed, today, 70 percent of Chilean wine is exported. But there’s a dark side, too. Chile’s
early reputation for the $6.99 steal has inhibited the development of a vibrant upscale wine
industry founded on more complex, higher-quality wines. Even now, few wine lovers with
$50 to spend on a bottle of wine head straight for the Chile aisle in the wine shop. Or at
least, until recently they haven’t. But Chile is changing, and fine wine is becoming a part
of its future.
    In winter, Chile’s vineyards look stark and somber against the backdrop of the magnificent Andes Mountains.


                                 THE QUICK SIP ON CHILE
         CHILE’S MODERN WINE industry achieved international recognition in the early 1980s
         for bargain-priced wines (especially chardonnay and cabernet sauvignon) intended for
         export. Today, many top Chilean winemakers are focused on producing higher-quality,
         more expensive wines while continuing to maintain a reputation for value quaffs.
         WHILE THERE IS VASTLY more cabernet sauvignon planted in Chile than any other
         grape variety, the country’s signature grape is carmenère, a red grape variety
         indigenous to Bordeaux but now virtually extinct there.
         CHILE’S MOST NOTABLE wine area is the vast Valle Central (“Central Valley”), where
         a majority of the most important appellations are to be found, including the two most
         renowned: Maipo Valley and Colchagua Valley.

   The first European vines (Vitis vinifera) in Chile were Spanish varieties planted in the
mid-sixteenth century by Spanish missionaries and conquistadores, who carried them
directly to Chile (and later, overland to Chile from Peru and Mexico). The important first
of these varieties was listán prieto, which went on to form the foundation for the entire
wine industry in the Americas. Listán prieto was originally known in Chile as criolla chica
(“creole girl”), but by the nineteenth century, the variety was so common it was
rechristened simply as país (“country”). It was the same variety as the grape known as
misión in Mexico, and eventually, as it was brought north, known as mission in California,
New Mexico, and Texas.
    Despite Spain’s historic and political hegemony in Chile, France, not Spain, has had the
greatest influence on the country’s wines. In the mid-nineteenth century, rich Chilean
landowners and mining barons showcased their wealth by building wine estates modeled
after Bordeaux châteaux. Bordeaux, after all, was the wine superpower of the era, and
after the 1855 Classification, grapes from Bordeaux’s top communes were held in almost
religious esteem. The Chileans planted vineyards with imported French grapes, most
notably cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and (although they probably didn’t know it at the
time) carmenère. And whenever possible, they hired French winemakers, who, by the
latter part of the century, were easy to lure from their homeland thanks to a twist of fate.
The deadly insect phylloxera had just begun its sweep through France. As vineyard after
vineyard was destroyed, unemployed winemakers looked to other wine regions, including
the wine frontiers of the New World. (Although phylloxera ultimately ravaged vineyards
in virtually every wine-producing country, Chile has never been affected.)
                   THE CURIOUS ABSENCE OF PHYLLOXERA
  As of this book’s writing, Chilean vineyards have never been victims of the lethal insect phylloxera, which
  devastated most of the world’s vineyards in the mid- and late-nineteenth century. Chile, in fact, is the only
  major wine country in the world where no phylloxera exists. Although Chile’s physical isolation, dry soil,
  and use of flood irrigation may all have helped to protect the country, phylloxera’s absence is not fully
  understood—especially given the fact that phylloxera is present right next door, in Argentina. Some
  scientists speculate that it’s only a matter of time before the pest finds a route in, despite the Chilean
  government’s strict quarantine requirements for plant materials. As a result of that fear, some of Chile’s
  modern vineyards are based on vines grafted onto phylloxera-resistant rootstock—but not all of them.
  Chauvinistic Chileans argue that the flavor of wine from vines planted on the vine’s own (vinifera) roots is
  better, somehow more authentic. This has never been demonstrated, nor have blind tastings revealed
  ungrafted vines to produce superior wine. What is known comes down to cold hard cash. Between the
  cost of the rootstock itself and the labor cost of grafting, a vineyard on rootstock costs four times more to
  plant than a vineyard where the vine is planted with its own roots.

   For much of the twentieth century, Chilean wine was unexceptional and serviceable,
rarely more. The combined impact of political instability, bureaucratic red tape, high
taxes, low wages, and a local market that seemed perfectly satisfied with (if not thankful
for) inexpensive quaffing wine effectively handcuffed Chilean winemakers and limited the
scope of their ambitions.




Alexandra Marnier Lapostolle, owner of Lapostolle, and the woman who, more than any other, ushered into Chile a fine-
                                                  wine revolution.

   Then, in the late 1980s, vast changes in the country’s political, economic, and social
climate led to considerable domestic and foreign investment in the wine industry. In less
than two decades, Chile went from being a Third World wine producer to being dubbed
the Bordeaux of South America. Among the first leading European wine families to invest
were the Torres family from Spain and the Rothschilds from Château Lafite-Rothschild, in
Bordeaux, who bought land in Curicó and Colchagua (Kohl-CHA-gwa), respectively.
Within a few years, Paul Pontallier, director of Bordeaux’s Château Margaux, and Bruno
Prats, the former owner of Château Cos d’Estournel, founded a Chilean winery called
Domaine Paul Bruno (and later renamed Viña Aquitania). From the United States,
Chilean-born vintner Agustin Huneeus, owner of the prestigious Napa Valley winery
Quintessa, jumped into the game, buying land in the cool, coastal valley of Casablanca
and founding Veramonte winery in 1990. But perhaps no outsider has accelerated the
reputation of Chilean wine more than Frenchwoman Alexandra Marnier Lapostolle
(owner, with her family, of the famous French liqueur firm Grand Marnier). In 1994,
Marnier Lapostolle bought property in the Colchagua Valley and immediately hired
French enologist Michel Rolland (the world’s most famous consulting winemaker) to help
make world-class wine at the Lapostolle winery.
                                 THE GRAPES OF CHILE
                                               WHITES
CHARDONNAY: Along with sauvignon blanc, chardonnay is one of the two most important white grapes.
It makes good, drinkable wines that rarely achieve complexity or sophistication.
SAUVIGNON BLANC: Many Chilean wine-makers consider this grape better suited to Chile than
chardonnay. It makes sassy, fresh wines with an unmistakable bolt of greenness.
SAUVIGNON GRIS: A gray-colored mutation of sauvignon blanc that tastes less herbal. Small amounts
are grown in Chile.
SAUVIGNON VERT: Not related to sauvignon blanc, despite its name; rather, the grape is the same as
sauvignonasse and northern Italy’s friulano. In Chile, it makes a wine with light herbal and almond
flavors.

                                                 REDS
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: Chile’s major grape; it makes a full range of styles, from quaffing wines to
quite extraordinary wines. It is often blended with carmenère and merlot to make Chile’s greatest wines.
CARMENÈRE: A variety brought to Chile in the late-nineteenth century from Bordeaux, where, for all
practical purposes, it no longer exists. Originally mis-identified as merlot, it is today considered Chile’s
signature grape, and plantings are on a dramatic rise. The highest-quality examples are fascinating, soft,
plush wines redolent of green tobacco, coffee, and leather.
MERLOT: Chile’s second-most-planted fine-wine grape after cabernet sauvignon, merlot makes good to
very good wines.
PAÍS: A major grape, país is Chile’s historic mass-production grape, brought in the sixteenth century from
Spain, where it is known as listán prieto. It is still widely planted for use in jug wines.
PINOT NOIR: A minor grape, but plantings are on the rise thanks to export demand for inexpensive pinot
noir. So far, it makes mostly undistinguished wine, except in the hands of a very few producers.
SYRAH: An up-and-coming Chilean grape, syrah makes surprisingly good wines, with classic gamy/spicy
aromas and flavors. It is sometimes blended with carmenère to very good result.
 The largest winery in South America and one of the Chilean “old guard,” Concha y Toro was founded in 1883 by Don
                  Melchor de Santiago Concha y Toro, who brought vines to Santiago from Bordeaux.


                                               THE ANDES
     Rising up behind many of Chile’s vineyards are the majestic Andes, the longest mountain chain in the
     world. The Andean peaks reach 22,000 feet (6,700 meters) and are exceeded in elevation only by the
     Himalayas. When the mountain chain was formed, sedimentary rocks were folded and bent into ridges,
     creating many of the sheltered valleys in which Chile’s vineyards lie. Today, no visitor to Chile’s wine
     country (or to the wine country of Argentina, just on the other side of the Andes) can help but be awed by
     the sheer beauty of vineyards framed by these magnificent, snow-laden peaks.

   Simultaneously, Chile’s historic, grand wine firms, such as Cousiño-Macul, Concha y
Toro, Canepa, Errázuriz, Santa Rita, Undurraga, and Santa Carolina, spent millions
modernizing their wineries and buying both new equipment and new French and
American oak barrels. Moreover, for many of these firms, a whole new avenue of business
sprang to life: the international joint venture.
   In the early 1990s, Errázuriz partnered with California’s Robert Mondavi Winery to
create Seña, a Bordeaux blend that cost a startlingly high $55 in 1998, when it was first
released. A year later, the joint-venture team of Château Mouton-Rothschild and Concha y
Toro debuted their Bordeaux-style blend, Almaviva, at $70 a bottle.
                                THE SPIRIT OF THE DESERT
 On several trips to Chile, I’ve felt it culturally imperative to start the evening with a pisco sour (strictly for
 research purposes, of course). Chile’s famous and traditional distilled spirit, pisco, was first developed in
 Peru by Spanish settlers in the sixteenth century. By the mid-eighteenth century, however, northern Chile
 had become an important center of pisco production, and today, Chile ranks as the leading producer of
 the yellowish-colored brandy. Chilean pisco is made from grapes that, by law, can be grown only in the
 desertlike, high-altitude regions of Atacama and Coquimbo, in the northern part of the country. (In some
 parts of the Atacama Desert, no measurable rainfall has ever been recorded.)
   Pisco can be made from any one or a combination of muscat of Alexandria, torontel, and Pedro
 Ximénez grapes, which can grow only because snowmelt from the Andes creates small rivers that can
 be tapped for irrigation. The wine is aged for a few months in oak barrels and then distilled with mountain
 water.


   Momentum had begun to build. And at the same time, as all of the above was
happening, a new type of winery was also quietly emerging in Chile—the small wine
estate owned by a grower who, instead of selling his grapes, decided to market his own
brand.
   Remarkably, the success of Chile’s wine revolution hinged on a bet that the United
States and Great Britain would become the major markets for all of these new wines—
from the better-quality bargain wines to the new class of what the Chileans call “icon”
wines. To help ensure this would be the case, Chilean producers initially focused their
exports on wines that were already extremely popular, especially chardonnay, sauvignon
blanc, merlot, and cabernet sauvignon. By the early 2000s, the red Bordeaux variety
carmenère was also part of that list.
   As it turned out, the United States and Great Britain have not only become the leading
export markets for Chilean wine, but many of the more expensive wines are sold almost
exclusively in the two markets. During the fiscal year 2010 to 2011, for example, more
than eight million cases of Chilean wine were exported to the U.S., and more than ten
million to Great Britain.
  For an explanation of Chilean wine laws, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 929.

                 HUMPHREY BOGART DID NOT SLEEP HERE
    Casablanca… ah, yes. Humphrey Bogart steamily kissing Ingrid Bergman. Morocco in the 1940s. WAIT
    —wrong Casablanca. The pastoral, vineyard-filled valley of Casablanca in Chile is not related to the
    iconic World War II movie of the same name. Chile’s Casablanca Valley is named after the Chilean town
    of Casablanca (the word means “white house”), founded in 1753 under the original name Santa Barbara
    Queen of Casablanca (that’s the English version) in honor of Doña Barbara de Braganza, wife of
    Fernando VI, King of Spain. Understandably, with the passage of time, the town’s name was shortened
    simply to Casablanca.
Some Chilean vineyards are harvested by machine, but the top grapes are still picked by hand.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Unlike the arid, extremely high-altitude vineyards in Argentina, on the other side of the
Andes, Chile’s main wine regions are low in altitude and relatively close to the sea. But
while they are cooled by the Pacific, Chilean vineyards are largely protected from extreme
maritime weather by a low-lying range of mountains, called the Coastal Range, just inland
from the coast.
   If you flipped Chile over into the northern hemisphere, the best vineyards would fall
roughly at the latitude of North Africa or southern Spain. But this image skews the reality
of Chilean climate and viticulture. Thanks to the Pacific Ocean’s Humboldt Current,
which brings ice-cold water and air up the coast from Antarctic waters, temperatures in
Chile’s wine country rarely rise above 90°F (32°C) and summertime nights are cool.
Indeed, in very cool regions like Casablanca Valley, harvest (theoretically the warmest
time of the year) can be so nippy that everyone is wearing fleece vests.

                THE MOST IMPORTANT CHILEAN WINES
                                    LEADING WINES
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CARMENÈRE red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MERLOT red
         SAUVIGNON BLANC white

                                     WINE OF NOTE
         SAUVIGNON VERT white

   Chile’s 506,000 acres (204,800 hectares) of vineyards and two hundred plus wineries
are located in five major Denominacions de Origen (DOs). From north to south, they are:
Atacama, Coquimbo, Aconcagua, the Valle Central, and the Southern Regions. The
northernmost DOs of Atacama and Coquimbo are desertlike; the DO Southern Regions is
the coldest. But the DOs to know are the ones in the middle—Aconcagua (ah-kon-KAH-
gwa) and the Valle Central (“Central Valley”). These make up Chile’s historic wine center,
and they are still today the areas where most of Chile’s best wine districts are to be found.
Indeed, a lion’s share of all of the wine exported from Chile comes from these two areas.
   Aconcagua, which takes its name from the nearby Aconcagua River, includes the
warmish Aconcagua Valley (home to Errázuriz, one of Chile’s prominent wine producers)
and the more coastal, cool, avant-garde districts of Casablanca Valley and San Antonio
Valley (and within San Antonio Valley, the very upcoming zone of Leyda Valley). In the
1990s, these regions experienced the wine equivalent of a mini gold rush, as investors
swooped in, bought land, and began planting sauvignon blanc and chardonnay.
  Chile’s dry climate and geographic isolation have meant that many wineries farm organically using an integrated,
                     sustainable approach. Here, friends of Cono Sur winery check out the vines.

   Southwest of Chile’s capital, Santiago, lies the large Valle Central, an expanse of fertile
and fairly flat land lying between the Andes and the Coastal Range, low-lying mountains
just inland from the Pacific. The most fertile part of the Valle Central (the center of the
valley, where the soils are deepest) is indeed fertile. There, an abundance of crops, from
wheat, corn, and beans to nuts, fruits, and sugar beets, are grown. By contrast, it’s in the
less fertile, granitic soils that wine grapes are grown. These soils often hug the hillsides,
and span five distinct sub-valleys within the Valle Central: Maipo, Cachapoal, Colchagua,
Curicó, and Maule. (Wine label readers note: Sometimes the Cachapoal and Colchagua
valleys are referred to together as the Rapel Valley.) Many of these sub-valleys are
separated by rivers that begin high in the Andes and flow to the Pacific Ocean.
   Of all of the important central valleys, perhaps the two most renowned are Maipo
Valley and Colchagua Valley. It’s from these two districts that most of Chile’s so-called
icon wines are sourced.




    Edged up against the city limits of Santiago, the Maipo Valley is one of Chile’s oldest
wine regions and, because of its proximity to the capital, many wineries are headquartered
there. This is where the huge wineries Concha y Toro and Cousiño-Macul are located, the
latter with its massive, cavernous cellars and stately 125-acre (50-hectare) park, a
dreamlike expanse of private gardens tended by fifteen full-time gardeners.
  Colchagua is fast becoming the Napa of Chile, especially the tiny district of Apalta, a
small, moon-shaped internal valley hard up against the Coastal Range. This is where
Neyen, Viña Montes’s Alpha M, and Lapostolle’s Clos Apalta wines are sourced, and all
three are among the most iconic of the icon wines of Chile, each with dozens of
international awards and high scores from critics.




             Dancing the cueca, a family of traditional dances from Chile, Argentina, and Bolivia.

    Soils in Chile’s top vineyards within the major valleys are often a type of well-drained,
friable granite. As one moves closer to the deepest center parts of the valleys, the soils get
more fertile and granitic stone is interspersed with loam, sand, and clay. In addition, on the
eastern side of these valleys, below the Andes, many vineyards have alluvial fans,
essentially rocky streams that have washed down mountainsides through the force of
water.
    Speaking of which, the easy availability of water is one of Chile’s leading viticultural
assets. But it can also be a downfall as far as the quality of the wine is concerned. Snow
melting on the Andes provides a steady supply of water that is channeled to the vineyards
through a system of dikes and canals. Growers who want huge crops to make bland wine
that can be sold for peanuts have no problem achieving such wines by literally flooding
the vineyards. The top wine producers eschew such practice, using controlled drip
irrigation—or even watering by hand—instead.
   Approximately fifteen varieties of wine grapes are grown in Chile—everything from
riesling and sémillon to pinot noir and malbec. But most wines are based on just five
major grapes: cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay, merlot, sauvignon blanc, and carmenère.
   Of all the grapes grown in Chile, cabernet sauvignon is by every account the star.
Moderately priced Chilean cabernets are usually very easy to drink, with soft, minty, black
currant, and olive flavors. The newer, high-priced icon cabernets and cabernet blends are
polished wines, with much more concentrated and complex flavors and firmer structure.




Chilean empanadas are a traditional dish. Usually made from chopped beef or pork plus black olives, hard-cooked eggs,
                   and raisins, they are especially delicious hot, when right out of a brick oven.

    In the 1990s, chardonnay was extensively planted in response to the seemingly
bottomless demand for inexpensive chardonnay in the United States and Great Britain.
Today, most Chilean chardonnay is exactly that—bargain-priced, uncomplicated, and with
a few exceptions (such as Lapostolle and Montes), unremarkable. Chilean sauvignon blanc
is definitely the more exciting white grape. Zesty and bold, the best Chilean sauvignons
have surprisingly vivid flavors. Chile is also known for the milder-tasting sauvignon vert,
which is not related to sauvignon blanc at all, but rather is a grape called sauvignonasse
(or, in Italy, friulano).
   But by all accounts the grape to watch is carmenère, which holds a signature position in
Chile, similar to that of malbec in Argentina. Carmenère (which the Chileans pronounce
car-men-AIR) has a fascinating story.
   The grape is indigenous to the Bordeaux area of France, but it ripens so late in the year
that, in Bordeaux, it barely ever achieved ripeness, producing wines that tasted more like
rhubarb juice than a grand vin. After the nineteenth-century phylloxera epidemic in
France, it was almost never replanted.




   In Chile, however, carmenère found a hospitable home. Chile’s warm, long growing
season was perfect for the grape, and thus, after being brought to Chile, probably in the
1850s with the great influx of “noble” grapes from Bordeaux, carmenère thrived. Not that
anyone knew it was carmenère, exactly. Grapevine importation was at an all-time high—
and at a time before any reliable method of grapevine identification existed in Chile. Over
the next 145 years, carmenère was generally misidentified as a late-ripening type of
merlot. Indeed, it wasn’t until the mid-1990s that many producers discovered that the
“merlots” they were exporting were, in fact, something else.
  Chilean huasos (“cowboys”) are skilled horsemen. Here, they rope a bull during a rodeo competition. Rodeo was
                                     declared Chile’s national sport in 1962.

    The word carmenère comes from the Latin carmin (“crimson”) and is a reference to the
bright reddish color of the variety’s leaves come harvest time. In a stroke of perfect
coincidence, carmenère was “rediscovered” at Viña Carmen, a winery in the Maipo Valley
in the mid-1990s. Álvaro Espinoza, Viña Carmen’s winemaker at the time, had brought in
Jean-Michel Boursiquot, a famous French ampelographer (grapevine identification
specialist) to determine why some merlots ripened so much later and tasted so different
from others. Boursiquot hypothesized that what Chile had in at least some of its “merlots”
was an entirely different grape called carmenère. DNA typing later confirmed that
Boursiquot was right.
   Subsequently (and sadly), some producers tore out their old carmenère vineyards and
replanted with true merlot. Others saw an opportunity—a chance to carve out a unique
position for Chile in the world of wine.
   Very low in acid, and lower in tannin than cabernet sauvignon, carmenère grapes—
when grown in great sites at low yields—make wines with a naturally plush texture (in
this they are like the top malbecs) that boast a mocha, coffee, green tobacco, and spice
character. But quality is the key. For as fascinating as top Chilean carmenères are, the
basic ones are definitely a yawn.
   Similarly, with top wines, when carmenère is blended with cabernet, it provides a nice
“fatness” to the final wine. Carmenère/cabernet blends like Neyen’s Espiritu de Apalta can
be stupendous wines—fleshy and spicy thanks to the carmenère, structured and majestic
thanks to the cabernet.
   Genetically, carmenère is a natural cross of cabernet franc and gros cabernet—the latter
an old Bordeaux variety, not the same as cabernet sauvignon, that is no longer cultivated.
                                      BRAZIL AND PERU
If you’ve been sidetracked by caipirinhas and pisco sours over the last few years, you’re forgiven. But
while you were “spiritually” preoccupied, the wine industries of both Brazil and Peru have been working
hard to become players on the South American wine scene.
   Brazil now boasts 213,000 acres (86,200 hectares) of vines, and Peru has 43,000 acres (17,400
hectares), although in both countries, per capita wine consumption is low and a modern wine-drinking
culture is in its infancy. Indeed, for both Brazil and Peru, a good share of their future success may hinge
on their ability to develop international export markets for their wines.
    The largest country in South America, Brazil has a long, though difficult, history of grape growing. The
first vines were brought here in 1532 by the Portuguese explorer Martim Afonso de Souza, who planted
them in the southeastern state of São Paulo. But even far away from the tropical jungles of the north, the
vines perished from disease in the hot, humid climate. Over the next century, many more attempts at
grape growing were made, with patchy success, by Jesuit priests hoping to make wine for Mass. A solid
wine industry finally took form in the late-nineteenth century, when Italian immigrants began planting
American hybrid grapes such as Isabella, as well as Italian Vitis vinifera varieties and tannat in the drier
mountainous region of the Serra Gaúcha near the border with Uruguay and Argentina, still the key region
for fine wines.
  Brazil’s most important wines include the reds syrah, tannat, malbec, cabernet sauvignon, and
tempranillo, but the category that’s been hot for decades is sparkling wine. Every type of sparkler is
made in Brazil—from traditional-method (Champagne) sparkling wines based on chardonnay and pinot
noir to Brazil’s version of simple prosecco to tank-fermented fizzy moscato.
  Thanks to its high altitude and dry, desertlike climate, Peru has many of the viticultural assets of
Argentina and northern Chile. Indeed, this may be the most exciting undiscovered wine country in South
America, not to mention the most dynamic culinarily.
   In 1528, the Spanish explorer Francisco Pizarro and his troops arrived at the northern border of the
vast Inca empire, which then included not only Peru but parts of Equador, Chile, and the Amazon basin.
By 1572, the henceforth named Viceroyalty of Peru belonged to the Spanish crown, and in the years in
between, grapevines were introduced both by explorers and priests. Over the next century, as the city of
Lima grew and as a mining industry took hold, the production of Peruvian wine increased substantially.
  But an enormous earthquake in the late 1600s, religious suppression in the mid-1700s, the rise in
popularity of the spirit pisco, and the demand for cotton, all contributed to the ripping out of vineyards and
wine’s general decline.
   In the 2000s, the Peruvian wine industry initiated a comeback. The industry is centered around the
towns of Pisco and Ica on the Central Coast. Numerous types of red and white wine are made primarily
from cabernet sauvignon, malbec, grenache, and barbera, as well as sauvignon blanc and torontel,
which, like Argentine torrontés, is a cross of mission and muscat of Alexandria.



                               WHEN YOU VISIT… CHILE
         A NUMBER OF CHILE’S top wineries are in the Maipo Valley, just minutes from the
         capital, Santiago, or a few hours’ drive south in the Colchagua and Cachapoal regions,
         or north of the city, in Casablanca. Do not miss, for example, Lapostolle’s stunning
         estate in the Colchagua Valley or the palatial Cousiño-Macul just minutes from the heart
         of Santiago. For all wineries, it is best to make an appointment in advance.
                            The Chilean Wines to Know
                                                    WHITES




                                                LAPOSTOLLE
                      CHARDONNAY | CUVÉE ALEXANDRE | CASABLANCA VALLEY
                                                 100% chardonnay
Lapostolle makes one of the great chardonnays of the New World. The wine is extraordinarily fresh and lively as
well as rich and opulent—loaded, in fact, with beautifully precise tropical fruit flavors. Unlike virtually all New
World wineries making chardonnay, Lapostolle goes through the vineyards multiple times at harvest. The early
pickings give bright, snappy fruit flavors, and the later pickings give deeper, more opulent, riper fruit flavors. The
process is expensive, to be sure, but the effort shows in the beauty and complexity of this wine.
                                                COUSIÑO-MACUL
                                      SAUVIGNON GRIS | MAIPO VALLEY
                                               100% sauvignon gris
This is a simple white, but it’s so delicious I wanted you to know about it. The historic, family-owned producer
Cousiño-Macul (founded in 1856) is one of the few producers in the world to make a 100 percent sauvignon gris
(an entirely different variety from sauvignon blanc). With its gorgeous tangerine aromas and lovely, minerally,
spicy flavors, this is the kind of fresh, pure wine you just can’t stop drinking on a summer night. Sauvignon gris is
more mouthfilling and fruity than sauvignon blanc, and has less of sauvignon blanc’s “greenness.”

                                                      REDS




                                                     NEYEN
                                ESPIRITU DE APALTA | COLCHAGUA VALLEY
                           Approximately 80% carmenère, 20% cabernet sauvignon
In the indigenous language of central Chile, neyen (which, curiously, can be read forward or backward) means
“spirit.” And the wine is certainly soulful. Dense and concentrated on the palate, Neyen has a texture that’s almost
furry. In great years, it has majestic power and a thundering, immediate impact of flavor. Spicy and minerally, it’s
evocative of espresso and bitter chocolate, with notes of violets and kirsch. The hand-watered Neyen vineyard
(which includes 120-year-old cabernet vines) is tucked into a serene cul-de-sac in Apalta—a tiny, prestigious area
within the very important region of Colchagua.
                                                  LAPOSTOLLE
                                    CLOS APALTA | COLCHAGUA VALLEY
    Percentages vary, but typically 40% to 80% merlot, with carmenère, cabernet sauvignon, and petit
                                                verdot
Lapostolle’s greatest wine is one of the icon wines of Chile, and it is stunning. Owner Alexandra Marnier
Lapostolle (of the Grand Marnier family) likes elegance in wine; her consultant, the famous French enologist
Michel Rolland, likes power. Together they’ve created a wine that bridges both worlds. No expense is spared in
making the wine: Among other nuances, the grapes are even de-stemmed by hand, by women. Clos Apalta’s flavors
are unique—a fascinating swirl of cocoa beans, vanilla, woodsmoke, and chaparral, along with something almost
piquant, like cayenne pepper. The texture is soft, almost syrupy. But what really gets to you is the finish… the long,
slow waves that don’t stop.
                                                  TERRANOBLE
                            CARMENÈRE | COSTA | CA2 | COLCHAGUA VALLEY
                                                 100% carmenère
From vineyards near the Coastal Range comes this fantastic carmenère that won’t require anyone to hock the family
jewels. Highly structured and sleek, in great vintages it’s got amazingly vivid violet and white pepper flavors offset
by whooshes of mocha and minerality. Terranoble winery, which specializes in carmenère, believes that two
different expressions of the grape exist in Colchagua. Their wine designated CA1 is from carmenère vineyards on
the eastern side of the valley, near the Andes. CA2 is the name of their wine from carmenère vineyards on the
western side of the valley, near the Coastal Range.
                                                  VERTICE
                               APALTA VINEYARD | COLCHAGUA VALLEY
                                 Approximately 51% carmenère, 49% syrah
The Vertice (VER-tea-say) wines are a partnership between the large Chilean wine company Viña Ventisquero and
renowned Australian winemaker John Duval (formerly the winemaker of Penfolds Grange). And what a win-win.
Ventisquero’s quartz-, granite-, and iron-rich vineyards and Duval’s sheer talent come together in a dramatic,
sumptuous, dark cocoa-y/spicy/earthy wine with a texture like a velvet pillow. But in top years, there’s also
breathtaking complexity and length here, making Vertice (the word vértice means “apex”) a showstopper.
                                                     MONTES
                                       ALPHA M | COLCHAGUA VALLEY
                 80% cabernet sauvignon, 10% cabernet franc, 5% merlot, 5% petit verdot
From the steep hillsides of their Finca de Apalta vineyard comes Montes’s Alpha M, a Bordeaux blend that, when it
was first made in the mid-1990s, ambitiously sought to be Chile’s equivalent of a First Growth. The wine is
massively intense and often closed when it is released. But a few years later (or after an hour or two in a decanter),
the wine unfurls into an amazing, richly structured beauty packed with cassis, woodsmoke, and graphite flavors.
The small, half-moon-shaped Apalta region—the best area in Chile for ageworthy reds—has long, warm days, but
it lies just 18 miles (29 kilometers) from the sea and thus benefits from cool ocean breezes.
                                                                   ARGENTINA

ARGENTINA RANKS FIFTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. ARGENTINIANS
DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 10 GALLONS (36 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Of all the wine-producing countries that have come of age in the past twenty years, none
has come quite so far so fast as Argentina.
   As of the late 1980s, much of the wine Argentina produced was, as it had been for
centuries, dirt cheap and dead ordinary. Sometimes oxidized and occasionally microbial, it
was funky but serviceable. The Argentines had grown used to it. And, with a big national
population and no major export markets, they drank virtually all of it themselves.
   Which, as it turns out, was a lot of wine. Until the late 1990s, Argentine per capita
consumption had hovered for decades at around 26 gallons (98 liters) a year. It’s now
about 9.5 gallons (36 liters) per year. (In the U.S., the figure is about 2.4 gallons/9.1 liters
per year.) Argentina not only drank a lot of wine, it also produced a lot. Indeed, since the
mid-1960s, in wine production volume, Argentina has ranked between fourth and sixth
place in the world; fifth is where it currently sits.
   Today, Argentina is a wine country transformed. The best wines (mostly malbecs) are
distinct in character and spellbinding in flavor. Even the simple wines have a delicious
charm. In less than a generation, Argentine wine has gone from run-of-the-mill to
remarkable.
    What prompted this profound shift in quality? A single answer is hard to come by. But
vintners point out that by 2000, Argentina had come to the end of nearly a century’s worth
of political instability and economic depression, during which time inflation often soared
over 1,000 percent and the country wobbled under dictators and a series of power-hungry
military governments. With the new economic, political, and social climate of the twenty-
first century came vast new business opportunities. A stellar wine industry was one.
   Then, within the new business-friendly climate, two other influences emerged as added
incentives.
   First was what might be called the “Chile factor.” Throughout the 1990s, Argentina had
watched as its neighbor Chile virtually reinvented its wine industry by improving the
quality of its basic wines, pricing those wines higher, and then exporting them at a good
profit, especially to the United States and Great Britain. Many of Argentina’s most
forward-thinking wineries figured (correctly): If Chile can do it, why can’t we?
 The stunning, 22,800-foot-high (6,960-meter) Andes Mountains—snow-covered year-round—frame the vineyards of
Mendoza. Here, the vineyards of Catena Zapata, a winery at the forefront of the new era for top-class wine in Argentina.

    Second was the astounding success of one man—Nicolás Catena. Catena grew up in an
Argentine winemaking family but graduated with a PhD in international economics from
Columbia University in New York, and had been a visiting professor at the University of
California at Berkeley. During his time in northern California, Catena developed a strong
friendship with Robert Mondavi, ultimately, he says, preferring Mondavi’s wines over
those of his own family. When it came time for Nicolas to take over the reins of the family
business, he did so with a resolute determination to make the sort of wines he had
experienced in Napa and Sonoma. During the 1980s and 1990s, Nicolas turned the family
wine business inside out—in the process, creating the winery he called Catena Zapata (the
sum of his parents’ surnames). By the late 1990s, it was the most innovative and
successful winery in the country. Nicolas Catena’s huge success in export markets like the
United States inspired other Argentine vintners, who hoped they could get a piece of the
pie.
   Fairly quickly, a new Argentine wine industry bloomed. Sometimes with the help of
foreign investment or via joint ventures, Argentine wineries hired French, Italian, and
American consultants (notably Michel Rolland, Alberto Antonini, and Paul Hobbs,
respectively) to help them modernize. New French oak barrels and temperature-controlled
stainless-steel tanks (the indispensable tools of modern winemaking) were purchased.
Most significantly, vineyards were often completely overhauled, with the old parral
system of overhead canopies replaced by modern trellising and modern farming
techniques that minimized yields and maximized quality.
    Importantly, Argentina quickly aimed higher than Chile, and sought to compete in
world markets not only with modestly priced, every-night wines, but also with fine,
ageworthy wines that could command $50 or more a bottle. Export figures told the story
best. In 1994, Argentina exported 389,000 gallons (14,700 hectoliters) of wine to one of
its lead customers, the United States. Four years later that figure was 3.3 million gallons
(124,900 hectoliters). And by 2010, Argentina way outpaced even Chile, with a record
export to the U.S. of nearly 40 million gallons worth just shy of $230 million.

                        THE QUICK SIP ON ARGENTINA
         THE MODERN ARGENTINE wine industry came of age at the turn of the twenty-first
         century. After centuries of producing copious amounts of cheap quaffing wine,
         Argentine winemakers are increasingly focused on producing world-class wine.
         MALBEC IS ARGENTINA’S signature grape. Nowhere else in the world does malbec
         rise to such heights of quality and richness as it does in Argentina.
         ARGENTINA’S MOST NOTABLE wine region is Mendoza, made up of vast, very high-
         altitude, steplike plains below the peaks of the Andes.

   At more than 1 million square miles (2.6 million square kilometers), Argentina is the
second-largest country in South America, after Brazil. From the hot jungles of the Tropic
of Capricorn in the north, the country extends southward to the icy habitat of penguins at
the tip of the continent, just a few hundred miles from Antarctica. Argentina’s western
border with Chile lies along the crest of the Andes. From these majestic peaks, the highest
in the Americas, the country slopes downward until it meets the Atlantic Ocean in the east.
   Winemaking began here, as it did in Chile, in the latter part of the sixteenth century,
with Spanish missionaries and conquistadores who brought grape seeds and cuttings with
them from Spain. Some vines landed in Chile or Peru first and were later brought overland
to Argentina. And some vine varieties may have been born spontaneously—the result of
natural crossings of European varieties that occurred in Argentina itself. Initially, the most
significant of these grapes was criolla grande (“big Creole”), an Argentine-born, pink-
skinned member of the group of vines with criolla in the name, but a grape whose parents
are not known. It made (and makes) the most bland of bland rosé and white red wines.
   But there was also another criolla—the so-called criolla chica (“Creole girl”)—which
came to Argentina directly from Spain. From DNA typing, we know that this was the
Spanish grape listán prieto—the same grape as Chile’s país and California’s mission. (For
the full story of the intersection between these grapes, see the criolla and listán prieto
entries in Getting to Know the Grapes, pages 81 and 86, respectively). In time, in
Argentina, listán prieto crossed naturally with muscat of Alexandria (which had also been
brought from Spain). One result was a pink-skinned grape called cereza (cherry), still
Argentina’s most widely planted grape but used only for the most basic supermarket rosés
and whites. Another spontaneous cross of these two parents resulted, however, in
something quite amazing: the white grapes torrontés Riojano and torrontés Sanjuanino.
(More on this in a moment.)
   Although the early Spanish settlers planted vines on the Argentine coast as well as
inland, it soon became apparent that the high-altitude, sunny, bone-dry plains below the
Andean peaks were an ideal location. Employing a system of dams and canals begun
hundreds of years before by the Incas and local Huarpe Indians, the early missionaries
learned to use snowmelt from the mountains to irrigate what otherwise would have been a
virtual desert. With a constant supply of water, vineyards flourished.
    In the 1820s, with the end of Spanish colonial rule, waves of European immigrants—
mostly from Italy, France, and Spain—came to Argentina, bringing vines with them. (The
first malbec in Argentina dates from this time.) They were followed in the 1890s by a
second wave of Italians, French, and Spaniards, many of whom were from wine-producing
regions and were escaping the phylloxera epidemic, which had ravaged the vineyards of
the Old World. (Today, Argentine winemakers often joke that roughly half of them are
Italian by descent, half are Spanish, but the wines they produce virtually all come from
—oh, no!—French varieties.) For all of these immigrants, wine was an integral part of
daily life. In Argentina, they found a place where wine could play a similar role.
   One of the most important early events in the formation of the Argentine wine industry
happened in 1853, with the founding of the Quinta Nacional, the national vine nursery. Its
creator, the Frenchman Michel Aimé Pouget, established the nursery by bringing
numerous vine cuttings from France, including the reds malbec, cabernet sauvignon, pinot
noir, gamay, grenache, and petit verdot, as well as the whites sémillon, malvasia, and
muscat. Criolla grande and cereza now had serious competition.
   Then, in 1885, the first railway linking Argentina’s premier wine region, Mendoza,
with its capital city, Buenos Aires, was finished, opening access to a huge new market of
wine drinkers. By 1900, Argentina had the beginnings of a massive wine industry.
   There are now some 1,400 wineries in Argentina, according to the Instituto Nacional de
Vitivinicultura, including a few very large players who make wine (often sold not in
bottles, but in cartons like milk) primarily, if not exclusively, for the domestic market. But
the wineries we are most concerned with here are Argentina’s fine wine producers—a
growing number of well-capitalized, often family-owned or joint-venture companies
making some of the most spellbinding wines in South America. Among them: Alta Vista,
Achaval Ferrer, Bodega Noemia, Catena Zapata, Cheval des Andes (a joint venture
between Bordeaux’s famous Château Cheval Blanc and Terrazas de los Andes, a winery
owned primarily by Moët & Chandon), Clos de los Siete (a partnership that includes the
world’s most famous wine consultant, Michel Rolland), Viña Cobos (begun by famous
U.S. winemaker Paul Hobbs and partners), Dominio del Plata, Fabre Montmayou, Bodega
Piedra Negra, Nieto Senetiner, O. Fournier, Renacer, Salentein, Terrazas de los Andes,
Tritono, Trivento, and Vistalba, among others.




               THE MOST IMPORTANT ARGENTINE WINES
                                    LEADING WINES
         CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
         CHARDONNAY white
         MALBEC red
         TORRONTÉS white

                                     WINE OF NOTE
         BONARDA red

   Almost unilaterally, their star grape is malbec, a variety that, in Bordeaux (where it is
also grown), ranks well below cabernet sauvignon and merlot in quality. In Argentina,
however, malbec can broach magic.
For an explanation of Argentine wine laws, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page 929.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

Argentina’s 545,000-plus acres (220,600 hectares) of vineyards are found in seven
important wine provinces in the west central part of the country, scattered across the
foothills of the Andes at elevations ranging up to 5,000 feet (1,500 meters) above sea
level, making these some of the highest-altitude wine areas in the world. (Chile’s major
wine regions are directly across the Andes; close to the Pacific coast, they are therefore
considerably lower in elevation.)
                                       TANGO LESSONS
 “If music be the food of love, play on,” says Duke Orsino in Shakespeare’s Twelfth Night. If the music had
 been tango and the duke had been drinking malbec, well, the romance part would have fallen quickly
 (and deeply) in place.
    Indeed, while wine tasting seems romantic the world over, it’s only in Argentina that you could find
 yourself at a winery at midnight, sipping a soft, saturated red wine while watching a man and a woman,
 entwined in each other, move, in raw desire, across a sweeping marble floor. (If nothing else, the
 provocativeness of wine takes on a whole new meaning here.)
    The national dance of Argentina, the tango, is thought to have originated in working-class slums in
 Buenos Aires, as well as in Montevideo, Uruguay, in the late 1800s. While many styles of tango now
 exist, the dance is characterized by a palpable sexiness and the close embrace of the partners, who
 often seem joined at the hip, thighs, and chest. According to Ernesto Catena, one of the country’s leading
 vintners, the tango is all about “desireability”—not unlike Argentine wines themselves. Maybe more
 winemakers around the world need tango lessons.

   The provinces are often grouped, north to south, into three main areas:
THE NORTHWEST,      generally the warmest region; includes the provinces Salta, Catamarca,
and La Rioja
CUYO,   the largest region, in the middle; includes Mendoza and San Juan
PATAGONIA,   the farthest south, coolest, and smallest region; includes Neuquén and Río
Negro
   Of these, Mendoza, in the Cuyo region, is by far the largest and most important
province. We will examine it in more detail later in this section.
   With the exception of Patagonia, Argentina’s wine regions all have a dry, desertlike
climate, with copious amounts of intense sunlight—some 320 days per year on average—
and rainfall that rarely exceeds 8 to 10 inches (20 to 25 centimeters) per year. Amazingly,
despite the strong sunlight, temperatures are generally mild thanks to the high elevation of
the vineyards. Indeed, during the long grape-growing cycle, vineyard temperatures are
surprisingly just 60°F to 75°F (16°C to 24°C).
Yes, there was a llama in this vineyard—a whole goofy flock of them, in fact. Llamas migrated to South America from the
                                  plains of North America some three million years ago.
                            THE GRAPES OF ARGENTINA
                                               WHITES
CHARDONNAY: A major grape, especially for exported wines. Wine styles range from simple to toasty
and oaky, in the manner of many California chardonnays.
TORRONTÉS: An Argentine specialty, although there are three distinct varieties with torrontés as part of
their names. The most famous and widespread is torrontés Riojana, which makes delightful, dry, spicy,
aromatic wines with a lightly unctuous texture. It is a centuries-old natural crossing of muscat of
Alexandria with the red grape listán prieto. More rare is torrontés Sanjuanino, also a natural cross of
muscat of Alexandria and listán prieto. And the final variety, torrontés Mendocino, is generally not as
aromatic or high in quality; only one of its parents (muscat of Alexandria) is known.

                                                 REDS
BARBERA, SANGIOVESE, AND TEMPRANILLO: Planted by early Italian and Spanish immigrants,
these varieties are used mainly in inexpensive blends that are sold in jugs and cartons, although
sometimes they are made into varietal wines.
BONARDA: Once Argentina’s main red grape, bonarda is now second to malbec. It makes tasty, bold
wines that can have some complexity with age. Despite its name, it is not related to the Italian bonarda
Piemontese. DNA analysis reveals that Argentine bonarda is the French grape douce noir, which
originated in the Savoie region of France. In California, douce noir (bonarda) is called charbono.
CABERNET SAUVIGNON: An important red mainly intended for the export market. Its wines can range
from simple to powerful and sleek.
CEREZA: The most widely planted variety, it is used for inexpensive wines sold in cartons on the
domestic market. Like two of the torrontés varieties, it is a cross of listán prieto and muscat of Alexandria,
but is not as successful. The word means “cherry” in Spanish.
CRIOLLA CHICA: The same grape as listán prieto, the original grape variety brought to Argentina from
Spain.
CRIOLLA GRANDE: A widely planted if undistinguished pinkish-skinned grape related to other criollas,
but its parents are not known. It is used to make coarse, bland white and rosé wines sold on the
Argentine domestic market in jugs or cardboard cartons, or in bulk.
MALBEC: Argentina’s most important and impressive red. The grape originated in southwestern France,
near the region of Cahors, where it is known by its proper name, côt. The first malbec vines were brought
to Argentina in the 1830s, and better selections arrived in the 1890s. In the top sites and in the hands of
the best winemakers, the grape makes wines of surprising grip, depth, concentration, and velvety
texture.
MERLOT: While less prestigious and less successful than cabernet sauvignon, mer-lot is still a source of
good-value wines mainly for the export market.
 The Argentine asado is a barbecue built for carnivores. Every cut of beef imaginable is thrown on the grill along with
          sausages, ribs, chivito (baby goat), and a few, ahem, surprises. This is malbec territory, big time.

   Immense luminosity—but without immense heat—creates a unique environment for
photosynthesis and ripening. The top Argentine malbecs, for example, are often lush and
rich in flavor, yet never ponderous, fat, and alcoholic in the way wines from very warm
regions can be. As an aside, the bone-dry air means that Argentine vineyards are mostly
free of diseases, virtually eliminating the need to spray preventive chemicals.
   Of course, the lack of rain means irrigation is essential. For new vineyards, that means
drip irrigation, which uses water sparingly. But some older vineyards are still irrigated by
the historic old canal system. Interestingly, vineyard properties do not automatically come
with water rights; even water from the narrow canals must be licensed and paid for by the
vintner.

                                   SPEAKING OF MALBEC . . .
     Although it is now famous in Argentina, malbec’s ancestral home is Cahors, a tiny, ancient wine region
     in southwest France. Here, the wine is known as le vin noir, “the black wine,” not only because of its
     dark color, but also because of its severe, tannic, “dark” flavors. The word malbec is actually a nickname
     for the grape’s true ampelographic name: côt. In the nineteenth century, malbec was a slang term for
     someone who spoke badly of others (from the French mal, or “bad,” and bec, or “mouth”). There must
     have been a lot of malbecs in Cahors, for the word became a common surname—and an affectionate
     term for the local grapes.

    While no winemaker here worries about rain, there is one type of moisture that can be
frightening and ruinous: hail. The legendary hailstorms that can build off the Andes in
March and April (right during harvest) have, all too many times, wiped out entire
vineyards. (Local wisdom says there’s a one in ten chance every year of complete
devastation.) Just a few decades ago, Argentine vintners hired “witch doctors” to cast
spells to protect against the ice balls. Today, many vineyards are protected with expensive
hail netting. The netting (which does reduce the direct light of the sun on the grapes) must
be replaced every five or so years—a cost that most other vineyard owners around the
world don’t have to worry about.
   A word about soils. While Argentina is a huge country, the wine districts are all in well-
drained areas of very low soil fertility—a good thing for grapevines, as lack of water and
low fertility lead to small yields. Many vineyards are visibly gravelly and rocky, thanks to
deposits from glaciers and rivers millennia ago. Many also contain significant amounts of
sand, clay, and limestone.
   Like Chile, Argentina has never been the victim of phylloxera, the insect that
decimated many of the world’s vineyards in the mid- and late-nineteenth century and
showed up again in the 1980s and 1990s, destroying many vineyards in the western United
States. As a result, many Argentine wines are made from vines that still grow on their own
roots (not on pest-tolerant rootstocks, as has been typical throughout the world for a
century). It’s not that phylloxera doesn’t exist here—it does, in spots. But for reasons no
one seems to fully understand, the insects here do not have a fully functioning “fly cycle”
(phylloxera are airborne during part of their lives), causing difficulty in reproduction. In
addition, phylloxera have a hard time thriving in sandy, dry soils and in soils that can be
flooded via irrigation if need be. Still, most modern Argentine winemakers say they don’t
plan to press their entomological luck, and thus, new vineyards are almost always planted
on rootstock.
              PERFECTING THE RED-WINE-WITH-MEAT RULE
 In no other country in the world is beef as celebrated, or as much a part of daily life, as it is in Argentina.
 Argentines eat beef in every form—breaded, fried, rolled, stuffed, chopped, and combined with raisins,
 olives, and eggs in empanadas. But perhaps most irresistible of all is beef right off the parilla, or grill, as
 part of the Argentine asado, a no-holds-barred barbecue for which ribs, chorizo (sausage), chivito (baby
 goat), and vizchaca (why didn’t someone tell me this was chinchilla before I ate it?) are also obligatory.
 But it’s the beef, above all, that counts. Beef is so much a part of Argentine cuisine that Argentines eat
 more of it than almost any other people in the world. In 2010, consumption was an enthusiastic 124
 pounds (56 kilograms) per person per year. (In the United States, itself no slouch in the beef department,
 per capita consumption was approximately 60 pounds/27 kilograms in 2010.) Argentine beef is relatively
 lean, with a pronounced flavor that Argentines say is the true beef flavor, attributable to the fact that the
 cattle feed on grasses as they roam over enormous expanses of land, rather than being fattened in feed
 lots and fed growth hormones. And what do the Argentines drink with their national culinary treasure?
 Their national vinous treasure: malbec. (Wine, incidentally, was actually signed into law as Argentina’s
 national beverage by President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner in 2010.)

   The most famous grape in Argentina—and specifically in Mendoza—is malbec. While
widely associated with Bordeaux (it’s one of the permitted red varieties there), malbec is
native to the area around Cahors, slightly south of Bordeaux, in southwest France.
   In Cahors, malbec is known by its original name, côt. But while the grape may be the
same, the wine has hugely different characteristics depending on where the grapes are
grown. Cahors’ côt, for example, is extremely hard, sleek, and tannic. Argentine malbec,
on the other hand, is usually remarkably soft, rich, and palate-coating. And in Bordeaux,
the grape makes a wine somewhere in the middle of those flavor bookends.
   Not that there’s much malbec left in Bordeaux. The variety is prone to certain fungal
diseases, and thus, after the phylloxera epidemic of the late 1800s, very little was
replanted in Bordeaux, a wet climate at risk for fungal problems. Today, a typical
Bordeaux wine has less than 10 percent malbec, if it has any at all.
  In arid Argentina, however, the grape variety thrived and continues to do so. Indeed,
Argentina may now have the deepest DNA pool of malbec and malbec clones in the world.
   Malbec also does very well in California, where it is increasingly planted and used to
add richness and dark, cocoalike flavors to many top-notch California cabernet blends.

MENDOZA
Mendoza is the name of Argentina’s leading wine province, and the name of the
province’s capital city, founded in 1561. The province and city were named for Don
García Hurtado de Mendoza, a sixteenth-century Chilean governor (Mendoza was once a
Chilean colony and belonged to what was called the Captaincy of Chile).
   Huddled in the high desert foothills of the Andes, the province covers more than 36
million acres (14.6 million hectares)—yes, million. Indeed, at more than 57,000 square
miles (147,600 square kilometers), Mendoza is about the size of New York State. Not all
of this huge area is covered by vineyards, however. Given the prominence of wines from
Mendoza, it’s interesting to know that less than 5 percent of the surface area of the
province is planted with grapevines.
   Nonetheless, Mendoza is more than just the leading wine region—it is the heartbeat of
the Argentine wine industry. Virtually all of the wineries of any importance are to be
found here, and a map of the province reads like a Who’s Who of wineries. Indeed, of the
approximately 1,400 wineries in Argentina, nearly 1,000 are in this one province, and a
majority of all Argentine wine, including the vast majority of all malbec, is grown here.
   The region lies directly west of Buenos Aires, roughly 1,000 miles (1,600 kilometers)
inland from the Atlantic Ocean. The vineyards, at 4,000 feet (1,200 meters) and more
above sea level, are framed by the snowcapped Andes, and are the highest in the country.
The climate is, as I’ve noted, extremely dry. But it’s the light one never forgets. What the
Mendozans call “sunlight density” is nothing short of riveting.
   Within Mendoza province, the most important subregions fall south of Mendoza city
along the Ruta 40 (Highway 40) corridor. These include the two well-known subregions
Luján de Cuyo and the Uco Valley, the latter made up of the three well-known wine
districts Tupungato, Tunuyán, and San Carlos.

SALTA
While nowhere close to Mendoza in terms of the volume of wine produced, the province
of Salta, in northernmost Argentina (a twoday drive north of Mendoza), is a place any
wine lover should know. The region itself was founded in the fifteenth century by Incas
moving out of Peru. It is warm and more moist this far north, with cold nights thanks to
altitudes of 5,600 feet (1,700 meters) and higher. And it is here that Argentina’s best
torrontés (specifically, the variety known as torrontés Riojana) is grown.
   Torrontés Riojana is, of course, Argentina’s top white wine—a wine of dazzling
aromatics with a dry, snappy flavor, and a curious, unctuous feel. The top torrontés wines
tend to come from Salta’s wine capital, the town of Cafayate. Most of the torrontés here is
grown using the parral system of pergolas that lift the vines high overhead, keeping the
clusters cool, free of sunburn, and dry of evaporating dew.
  Among my favorite torrontés wines are those made by Alta Vista, Terrazas de los
Andes, and Tomero.
                                             URUGUAY
In the language of the indigenous people, the Guaraní, Uruguay means “river of birds” thanks to their
more than 450 species of birds. There are far fewer species of grapes, of course, but Uruguay is
nonetheless one of the most exciting emerging wine regions in the Americas. Grapevines were first
brought there in the 1870s by Basque immigrants, but a serious wine industry began only as of the
1980s and 1990s. Today, the country has 22,000 acres (8,900 hectares) of vineyards and 270 wineries,
most of which are small and family-run and sometimes helped by one of several famous international
wine consultants, among them the American Paul Hobbs, the Italian Alberto Antonini, and the
Frenchman Michel Rolland.
   Uruguay (which lies at the same latitude range as Argentina, South Africa, and Australia) has a gentle
maritime climate due to its location on the edge of the Atlantic Ocean. The country also boasts the purest
vineyard environment in the world, according to the Environmental Sustainability Index published by Yale
and Columbia Universities in the United States (Finland and Norway rank higher for total environmental
purity, but good luck trying to grow grapes in either country).
   The signature grape of Uruguay is tannat, a tannic grape that originated in southwest France, although
today more tannat is grown in Uruguay than in the entire rest of the world. Aged in oak to soften it, tannat
(whose name refers to the dark color of the grapes) can be rich and mouthfilling, with black cherry,
chocolate, and espresso flavors. In Uruguay, it is considered the perfect accompaniment to the popular
local asados, wood-fired barbecues devoted to Uruguay’s high-quality beef. Other promising grape
varieties include merlot, cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, and the unusual French
white variety petit manseng, which was brought to Uruguay at the same time as tannat, and makes dry,
floral wines. Some of the best producers of Uruguayan wine include Stagnari, Bouza, Pizzorno, Pisano,
and Juanicó.



                         WHEN YOU VISIT… ARGENTINA
        ASIDE FROM BEING the best-known wine region in Argentina, Mendoza is also the
        most accessible and rewarding for wine-tasting experiences. You’ll need a car to travel
        between destinations, but with so many new wineries and boutique hotels, you won’t
        have to drive far. Many of the wineries, like Familia Zuccardi, have fantastic restaurants
        that specialize in Argentine cuisine.
                        The Argentine Wines to Know
                                                   WHITES




                                    TERRAZAS DE LOS ANDES
                                              TORRONTÉS | SALTA
                                             100% torrontés Riojana
Terrazas de los Andes is making some of Argentina’s most intriguing and complex wines, including this beautifully
vivid, fresh torrontés, with its cooling aromas and flavors of lime blossom, lychee, and tangerine. But what really
escalates the deliciousness here is an intriguing touch of citrusy bitterness (like grapefruit pith), which gives the
wine its exotic distinctiveness.

                                                     REDS
                                                  RENACER
                                   MALBEC | GRAN RESERVA | MENDOZA
                                                  100% malbec
One look at the electric purple color of this wine and you can’t help thinking you’re in for something good. In point
of fact, you’re in for something great. Waves of exotic aromas and flavors—black figs, spices, minerals, cocoa—fill
your senses. At the same time, the texture of the wine knocks you out with its yin-yang of rockiness and lushness.
But the aspect I love most about Renacer’s Gran Reserva is its vividness and precision. It’s as if every molecule of
flavor is pulsing with intensity. Renacer makes Gran Reserva only in exceptional years, and the wine tastes like it.
                                              CATENA ZAPATA
                                         MALBEC | NICASIA | MENDOZA
                                                     100% malbec
I love many of the Catena Zapata wines, but Nicasia, named for the small area where the vineyard is located, is a
favorite. From a vineyard that gives less than 1 ton per acre, it’s a massively structured malbec, with its sappy
texture and explosive flavor. Yet for all of the wine’s ripe fruit and black licorice flavors, there’s also a beautiful
hum of acidity here. Indeed, it’s the wine’s impeccable balance between ripe fruit and acidity that gives always-
powerful Nicasia a sense of gracefulness.
                                         TERRAZAS DE LOS ANDES
                                 MALBEC | LAS COMPUERTAS | MENDOZA
                                                  100% malbec
Spellbinding precision and structure. That’s what Terrazas de los Andes’s top wine from the single vineyard Las
Compuertas possesses in great years. Indeed, this wine comes from vines that are more than eighty years old, and it
soars with a sense of majesty. The flavors are all about dark fruits, black licorice, charred meat, and spice, all
overlaid by a sprinkling of something deliciously dusty, like cocoa. The vineyard Las Compuertas (“the
floodgates”) is considered one of the top vineyards in Mendoza, and it’s the vineyard that inspired famous
winemaker Pierre Lurton, from Bordeaux’s Château Cheval Blanc, to begin making wine in Argentina.
                                          CHEVAL DES ANDES
                                                     MENDOZA
                    Approximately 50% malbec, 45% cabernet sauvignon, 5% petit verdot
Cheval des Andes makes only one wine—an expensive wine, intended to be among the very greatest wines of the
world. And like great Bordeaux, the wine is named simply by its estate; no designation of grape variety is given on
the label. The wine is a blend that includes fruit from malbec vines planted on their own roots in 1929. Like
Château Cheval Blanc (the wine to which it is an homage), Cheval des Andes defines the intersection of grace and
power. Complex and sumptuous, it’s got the full complement of Mendozan malbec aromas and flavors: spices,
grilled meat, licorice, espresso, dark fruits, dried herbs… and a texture like ribbons of black velvet. But at the same
time, there’s a sustained minerally, rocky character here that’s mesmerizing.
                                           NIETO SENETINER
                                         MALBEC | CADUS | MENDOZA
                                                    100% malbec
With its fine precison and concentration, Cadus (the word means “amphora”) from Nieto Senetiner is a beauty.
Sleek and less syrupy than many top malbecs, it is a structured wine, with wonderful violet aromas and flavors
evocative of spices, cassis, cocoa, and blackberries. And its finish lingers and lingers. Nieto Senetiner is one of the
larger wineries in Argentina, and it makes an inexpensive, simple malbec that’s fine for quaffing. But Cadus is their
top of the line, and it’s the one you want.




                                                    TOMERO
                                    MALBEC | GRAN RESERVA | MENDOZA
                                                    100% malbec
This small-production malbec is as dark and saturated as they come. With aromas and flavors evocative of
Christmas pudding or Fig Newtons, Tomero has an impression of sweetness thanks to the rich ripeness of the
grapes. Wonderful spice notes and a distinct minerality give the wine complexity. Tomero is owned by Carlos
Pulenta, one of the key figures in the Argentine wine industry and the scion of the family that built Argentina’s first
massive-production wine company—Peñaflor.
                                           ACHAVAL FERRER
                                 MALBEC | FINCA BELLA VISTA | MENDOZA
                                                  100% malbec
The soaring, savory aromas of this wine can cause you to imagine that you’re standing on the high Andean plain,
surrounded by chaparral. With intense and complex flavors of black figs, black licorice, peat moss, grilled meats,
minerals, and spices, Achaval Ferrer’s malbec is dramatic and lively. Less soft than many other malbecs, it is
monolithic in structure and intensity and delicious to drink with a thick grilled steak that’s crusty black on the
outside and pinkish red on the inside.
                                                ALMA NEGRA
                                              MISTERIO | MENDOZA
                                          Grape varieties never revealed
Alma Negra is owned by Ernesto Catena, son of Nicolas Catena, the father of the modern Argentine wine industry.
Rather iconoclastic and highly spiritual, Ernesto Catena never reveals the grapes in the logically named Misterio
(mystery). No matter, the wine is sensational. Incredibly spicy with loads of black licorice and blackberry flavors,
it’s also minerally, indeed almost salty, on the palate. The commanding structure is impeccable, and the texture,
grippy and almost furry, is fascinating. All in all, this is a sensational wine. (After much journalistic pressing, Mr.
Catena hinted that the mystery in question might involve cabernet franc, cabernet sauvignon, malbec, bonarda, and
syrah.)
                                                       SOUTH AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA RANKS EIGHTH AMONG WINE-PRODUCING COUNTRIES WORLDWIDE. SOUTH
AFRICANS DRINK AN AVERAGE OF 2 GALLONS (7.5 LITERS) OF WINE PER PERSON PER YEAR.

Of the more than fifty countries on the African continent, only eight are wine producers:
South Africa, Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Zimbabwe, and Kenya. Most
make only minuscule amounts of bland wine. South Africa, by comparison, is both a
leading wine producer (eighth in the world by volume) and the source of the continent’s
finest wines.
   Not quite twice as large as Texas, South Africa is bordered on the north by Namibia,
Botswana, and Zimbabwe, and on the east by Mozambique and Swaziland. The country
has about 323,000 acres (130,700 hectares) of planted vines, cared for by just over 3,500
grape growers who supply nearly six hundred wineries (known in South Africa as “wine
farms”). With about 1,800 miles (2,897 kilometers) of coastline, South Africa is one of the
only wine regions in the world sandwiched between two oceans—in South Africa’s case,
the Atlantic and the Indian.
   The first South African wines were made more than three centuries ago by Dutch
colonists who vinified the wild grapes they found growing on the southwestern tip (known
as the Western Cape) of the African continent. The colonists, employees of the Dutch East
India Company, planned to establish the Western Cape as a restocking station for food and
provisions for ships, halfway between Europe and the spice-rich East Indies.
   Although the presence of native grapes was encouraging to the colonists, the wine
made from them was not. The commander of the small settlement, Jan van Riebeeck,
immediately sent word back to Holland, imploring his employers to send European vine
cuttings on the next ship out. Within a decade, French vine cuttings—most probably
chenin blanc and muscat of Alexandria—were thriving in Western Cape soil.
   The closely spaced vineyards were too narrow to be worked by animal-drawn plows
and too extensive to be worked by the colonists alone. The colony relied, regrettably, on
slaves—at first Malay, and then, in 1658, Dutch ships brought two hundred slaves from
Madagascar and Mozambique to the settlement. The very next year, on the first day of the
harvest, February 2, 1659, van Riebeeck recorded in his journal: “Today, God be praised,
wine was pressed for the first time from Cape grapes.”
A baobab tree in the middle of the renowned vineyards of Groot Constantia, where the extraordinary dessert wine Vin de
Constance is made. Native to Africa and Madagascar, baobab trees are oddly shaped and long-lived (up to 2,000 years).


                          THE QUICK SIP ON SOUTH AFRICA
           SOUTH AFRICA has a more than three-hundred-year-old history of grape growing.
           THE BEST SOUTH AFRICAN wines come from an emerging group of small private
           estates devoted to making artisanal, high-quality wine. That said, a large percentage of
           South African wine is still utterly simple stuff made by large cooperatives.
           MOST DRY WINES are based on five well-known grapes: sauvignon blanc,
           chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and syrah. Along with these, the country is
           known for an unusual red wine specialty: pinotage. Some stunning (and famous) sweet
           wines are also made—often from muscat blanc à petits grains.

   Despite the long history of Western Cape winemaking, South African wines were
virtually unknown in the United States and in many European countries before the 1990s,
as a result of trade sanctions imposed in response to the South African policy of racial
apartheid. When apartheid ended and the bans on South African goods were lifted (mostly
in 1991), the doors of commerce swung open. By mid-decade, Western Cape wines had
begun to turn up in wine shops in Europe, as well as in the United States.
   South Africa has five major wine zones—referred to as geographical units. Of these,
only one is important for fine wine: the Western Cape, located in the most southwesterly
part of the country. Telescoping down further, within the Western Cape, one region is
more important than all others: the Coastal Region. All of South Africa’s top wine districts
are here. One of the smallest of these districts, Constantia, was already so well established
by the mid-1700s that a sweet, muscat-based wine named simply Constantia was
renowned throughout Europe and was reportedly a favorite of Napoléon.
   THE DESSERT WINE OF KINGS, POETS, AND PARTYGOERS
 During the nineteenth century, Constantia winery, nestled in a serene valley south of Cape Town, South
 Africa, was known for its sweet wine; during the twentieth century, it was known for throwing one hell of a
 party.
    Founded in 1685 by then governor of the Cape Simon van der Stel, Constantia was one of South
 Africa’s first “wine farms” (the local term for winery). Constantia produced Vin de Constance, a luscious
 dessert wine made from muscat blanc à petits grains grapes. The wine rose to become one of the most
 sought-after dessert wines in all of Europe, ordered by the case by Napoléon Bonaparte and never
 absent from the table of King Frederick the Great of Germany.
    In addition to being a royal preference, Vin de Constance was immortalized by some of the most well-
 respected authors and poets of their day. Jane Austen reflects on the wine’s “healing powers on a
 disappointed heart” in Sense and Sensibility, while Charles Dickens enshrines it as the cure-all in The
 Mystery of Edwin Drood. The wine even made its way into Baudelaire’s poetry: “Even more than
 Constantia, than opium, than Nuits, I prefer the elixir of your mouth, where love performs its slow dance.”
 Now, who could argue with that?
   With the death of van der Stel in 1712, Constantia was broken up into three entities—two wineries:
 Groot Constantia (Big Constantia) and Klein Constantia (Little Constantia); and a farm called Bergvliet
 (Mountain Stream).
    During the Roaring Twenties, Klein Constantia hosted the most extravagant parties on the African
 continent. After American heiress Clara Hussey de Villiers purchased and restored the Klein Constantia
 manor house in 1913, guests strolled the lawns alongside peacocks, while enjoying live orchestras and
 feasting on oysters and Russian caviar laid on barrels of ice arranged around the gardens. Jay Gatsby
 would have been proud.
    Today, both Groot Constantia and Klein Constantia continue to operate, and each continues to
 produce the fabled Vin de Constance. And while the courtly glamour of Constantia’s past may have
 waned slightly, the wine remains extraordinary. Klein Constantia, in particular, makes a Vin de Constance
 that is one of the greatest and most spiritual wine experiences to be had.




   If there is one factor that, more than any other, shaped the current state of South
African wine, it was the establishment of extremely powerful cooperatives at the turn of
the twentieth century. The cooperative movement began after the combined devastation of
the Anglo-Boer War and phylloxera, a root-killing insect (see page 30), left the country’s
vineyards in near ruins. In the aftermath of these destructive forces, South African
vineyards were replanted with a vengeance. Overproduction ensued, and grape prices hit
rock bottom. In 1905, the South African government appointed a commission to examine
the widespread financial depression in the wine industry. The result was the formation of
the first South African co-op, funded with huge government grants. The stage was set.
                                IS THE TABLECLOTH ON?
 South Africa’s Coastal Region includes one of the most impressive sights to be found in wine country
 anywhere—the 3,563-foot-high (1,086-meter), flat-topped, granite-based mountain known as Table
 Mountain. Singular and dramatic, with a plateau more than 2 miles (3.2 kilometers) long, Table Mountain
 forms an amphitheater around the charming, bustling seaside city of Cape Town. The mountain was
 formed approximately 250 million years ago as a result of massive geologic eruptions that resulted in
 plutons, domelike protrusions of hot lava that rose from deep within the earth to penetrate its crust. After
 cooling, the plutons of the Western Cape eroded into unusual, flat-topped mountains like Table Mountain.
 Fascinatingly, the top of Table Mountain is often covered by clouds, forming what the locals call the
 “tablecloth.”

   Almost a dozen co-ops sprung up over the next several years, but many of these were
unsuccessful. Grape prices plummeted again after World War I. In desperation, 10 million
vines were uprooted, and grape growers planted alfalfa fields to feed ostriches—ostrich
feathers being highly fashionable in Europe during the (roaring) 1920s. But when the
feather fad faded and growers went back to planting grapes, overproduction loomed yet
again.

            THE MOST IMPORTANT SOUTH AFRICAN WINES
                                          LEADING WINES
          CABERNET SAUVIGNON red
          CHARDONNAY white
          CHENIN BLANC white (dry and sweet)
          SAUVIGNON BLANC white
          SYRAH/SHIRAZ red

                                          WINES OF NOTE
          PINOTAGE red
          SPARKLING WINES white

   In 1918, one of the most massive, mighty cooperatives in the world was formed—the
KWV, or Koöperatieve Wijnbouwers Vereniging van Zuid Afrika (the Cooperative Wine
Growers’ Association of South Africa). Over the next few decades the KWV became
omnipotent. No wine could be made, sold, bought in South Africa, or exported from it,
except through the KWV. After the end of apartheid in 1991, wine surpluses disappeared
and wine sales and exports increased. The KWV was mostly dismantled, and today the
much-reduced company is focused largely on producing inexpensive brandy. Most
importantly, the grape growers and small wineries who had relied on the KWV to buy
their excess grapes and distill them have now turned their focus toward lowering yields
and making better, higher-quality wine instead.
   With the end of the KWV era, South Africa began moving toward the production of
quality wines. At first, the pace of change was modest. For example, even as late as 1990,
70 percent of all South African grapes were still being distilled into cheap brandy, sold as
table grapes, or even simply discarded. Only 30 percent were used to make wine intended
for consumers. Today, that picture is entirely reversed, with nearly 80 percent of all grapes
being made into wine.




                              A monkey sits contentedly among the vines.

   Still, South Africa is a wine region caught in a protracted struggle to modernize. On the
one hand, the country is blessed with an abundance of geological and climatic factors that
bode well for fantastic wine. On the other, South Africa remains economically strained
and technologically challenged. Too many wine companies, large and small, are still
working with poor-quality, outdated equipment, and are short on modern wine-making
expertise. Harvesting in South Africa is often inefficient, and the industry is fraught with
labor problems as well as occasional labor abuses.
   For example, South Africa still suffers from the vestiges of the so-called tot system,
whereby workers were paid in distilled alcohol in lieu of wages. Although the system was
officially declared illegal in 1962, the practice persisted for years, furthering the rampant
alcoholism and misery that have existed for generations among the poorest laborers,
virtually all of whom are black. In addition, in 2011, Human Rights Watch reported that
some laborers in the Western Cape’s wine and fruit industries were subject to appalling
conditions. In response, the top wineries with ethical labor practices have formed an
organization called the Wine and Agriculture Industry Ethical Trade Association (WIETA)
and have created much-needed fair labor standards.
                              THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE
 On a momentous day in 1488, the Portuguese navigator Bartolomeu Dias became the first European to
 sail through tempestuous seas past the rocky headland of the Cape Peninsula. He named the area Cabo
 Tormentoso, the Cape of Storms. Later, Portugal’s king, fearing that mariners would refuse to sail around
 the Cape to the Far East to trade, renamed it Cabo de Boa Esperança, the Cape of Good Hope. Dias’s
 achievement was stunning, for traveling south down the coastline of Africa, the Cape of Good Hope
 marked the point where a ship began to travel more eastward than southward, and thus on a direct
 course for Asia. Despite its importance, the Cape of Good Hope is not the southern tip of Africa. The
 southernmost point is Cape Agulhas, about 90 miles (145 kilometers) to the east-southeast.

    At this writing, South Africa still produces large quantities of undistinguished, cheap
wine. Most wine is still made by co-ops. But there is also a growing cadre of ambitious
small estates who are making remarkable wines, and in some cases pioneering entirely
new, cool coastal areas. Increasingly, there’s also much-needed foreign investment—not
only of capital, but also of expertise. While we’ve perhaps had only a small “taste” of it so
far, the South African wine revolution is clearly in full swing.
                           THE GRAPES OF SOUTH AFRICA
                                                 WHITES
 CAPE RIESLING: A minor grape when it comes to the production of fine dry wines, but it can make
 some delicious, old-style sweet wines. It is not related to riesling, despite its name, but is the same as the
 French grape crouchen blanc.
 CHARDONNAY: An important and very popular grape that is made into good every-night wines as well
 as stunningly complex, creamy wines.
 CHENIN BLANC: A major grape, although production is in decline. Historically it was often called steen.
 Small producers working with old vineyards are making stellar dry and sweet wines, although a lot of
 very neutral-tasting chenin blanc is also made by co-ops.
 MUSCAT OF ALEXANDRIA: One of the many grapes with the word muscat in the name, it is used,
 along with other muscat varieties, for sweet fortified wines, some of which can be very appealing.
 MUSCAT DE FRONTIGNAN: The South African name for the grape muscat blanc à petits grains, the
 leading muscat variety. It is used in the extremely famous dessert wine Vin de Constance.
 SAUVIGNON BLANC: A very important major grape used to make delicious, smoky, grassy, minerally,
 snappy dry wines with high acidity and lots of personality.

                                                   REDS
 CABERNET FRANC: A minor blending grape, generally used with cabernet sauvignon.
 CABERNET SAUVIGNON: A prestigious red grape planted in the best regions and often made into
 Bordeaux-style blends.
 CINSAUT: A southern French variety; in South Africa it’s often called hermitage. It is the source of light
 reds and is often used in blending.
 MERLOT: Gaining in popularity, although it is not yet as successful as cabernet sauvignon. Merlot is
 made as a varietal wine and is used for blending.
 PINOTAGE: A South African cross, in 1925, of cinsaut and pinot noir. It makes rustic reds that are rarely
 complex.
 PINOT NOIR: A minor grape; historically not very successful in South Africa, but its quality is improving.
 It is used primarily for sparkling wines.
 SYRAH/SHIRAZ: The grape goes by both names in South Africa, and shows considerable promise here.
 It is the source of popular, big-fruit wines with lots of smoky chocolate flavors. It is used for varietal wines
 as well as for blending.

  For an explanation of South African wine laws, see the Appendix on Wine Laws, page
929.
Men punch down the cap of grape skins by hand at Kanonkop winery in the Stellenbosch district of the Western Cape.
    THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

As noted earlier, grape growing and wine making in South Africa are spread out over five
huge areas known as geographical units, but most of these areas have the barest minimum
of a wine industry. For all practical purposes, the single area that matters most (and the
one to know) is the Western Cape—an area concentrated in the southwestern part of the
country, bordered on the west by the Atlantic Ocean and on the south by the Indian Ocean.
   The geology of the Western Cape is ancient and remarkable. Massive geologic
upheavals over millions of years resulted in majestic mountain ranges on the southern tip
of the Cape. The enormous pressures exerted during these upheavals caused folding and
uplifting, creating high peaks and deep valleys. On these slopes and in these valleys, South
African viticulture takes place today. About 250 million years ago, an intensive period of
folding and uplifting occurred, followed by massive erosion that “flat-topped” the
mountains. The results were dramatic sandstone mountains like Table Mountain (3,563
feet/1,086 meters high) and Simonsberg (4,590 feet/1,399 meters high).
                                     NELSON MANDELA
 Elected in 1994, Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela was South Africa’s first black president and the first to be
 elected with voter participation from all races. Mandela’s release from Victor Verster Prison in Paarl in
 1990, after more than twenty-seven years in confinement, signaled a new era in South African politics
 and paved the way for the lifting of trade sanctions and the importation of South African wine into the
 United States. Nelson Mandela’s connection to wine grew even more substantial in 2010, when his
 daughter Makaziwe and granddaughter Tukwini launched the House of Mandela wine brand, which
 includes a chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, shiraz, and a sparkling wine. For the Mandela family, who
 are part of the royal abaThembu lineage and the Madiba clan, honoring the ancient wisdom of one’s
 ancestors and honoring the earth gives meaning and purpose to life. Upon the release of their wines, the
 family wrote, “We have chosen wine as a bridge into the future.”

   The Western Cape is divided into five areas: Breede River Valley, Klein Karoo, Coastal
Region, Olifants River, and Cape South Coast. As mentioned earlier, the most established
of these (and the area from which the best wines to date have come) is the Coastal Region.
Spreading out like a fan from the charming city of Cape Town, the Coastal Region
includes the fine wine districts of Constantia, Franschhoek Valley, Paarl, and Stellenbosch.
Here the climate is largely Mediterranean, with a beautiful growing season free of frost
and rain. What occasionally could be scorching heat is kept at bay by the comingling of
cooling maritime breezes off the Atlantic and Indian Oceans. The best vineyard sites in
these districts are often on slopes, sheltered from the late afternoon sun.
                                     RICH BEYOND GRAPES
 South Africa has the largest known reserves of gold in the world, and is the foremost supplier
 (accounting for about 35 percent of total world production). Johannesburg, in fact, began as a gold-
 mining camp in the 1800s. Indeed, in 1961, South Africa’s modern currency was named the rand after a
 gold-mining region—Witwatersrand (“ridge of white waters” in Afrikaans). The ridge is a north-facing
 scarp 35 miles (56 kilometers) long, over 2 miles (3 kilometers) deep, and traversed by several north-
 flowing rivers that form impressive waterfalls. Forty percent of all the gold ever mined from the earth has
 been mined from this one place.
    In 1867, the country’s diamond industry began with a young boy who found a transparent “pebble” on his
 father’s farm. The pebble turned out to be a 21-carat diamond, and so began South Africa’s diamond rush. South
 Africa also has the largest known reserves of chromium, platinum, vanadium, manganese, andalusite, and fluorspar,
 as well as substantial deposits of many other minerals, such as coal, uranium, iron ore, antimony, asbestos, nickel,
 and phosphates.


   As seems logical, given so much geologic activity in this part of South Africa, soils
vary considerably in the top wine districts. Some of the most prominent types include
gravel, granite, clay, sand, schist, shale, and hutton, a deep, rich red soil also known as
Cape sandstone.




   Historically, more white grapes than red were grown in South Africa—a reflection of
the past importance of South African “sherry” and brandy. Indeed, brandy was so
important in the past that even as of 1993, more than 80 percent of all grapes planted were
white, and most of those were destined for distillation. By 2011, the percentage of white
grapes was down to 55 percent. Chenin blanc (the leading grape that had been grown at
high yields for brandy) accounted for much of what was lost.
   Although official viticultural statistics track the acreage of more than ninety grape
varieties in South Africa, the vast majority of the vineyards are planted with just seven
varieties: chenin blanc, chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, cabernet sauvignon, merlot, shiraz,
and pinotage. The most planted of these seven is still chenin blanc (although, as noted, its
acreage is in decline). Lots of South African chenin blanc is pleasant and simple at best.
But treasure troves of old chenin blanc vineyards can still be found, and the grapes from
these vineyards are often turned into amazingly delicious wines—both dry and sweet.
   Then there are sauvignon blanc and chardonnay, which are key grapes for top
producers. South African sauvignons are some of the most distinctive and bold in the
world. Wildly tangy, citrusy, minerally, and smoky, they have a gunflint character that’s
extremely appealing, as the terrific sauvignon blancs from Neil Ellis, Fairview, Saxenburg,
and others demonstrate. South African chardonnay, when at its best, is creamy,
sophisticated, and rich, without the overwrought buttery or oaky flavors that can often mar
New World chardonnays. Hamilton Russell is a perfect example.
   The leading red grape is cabernet sauvignon, followed by syrah and merlot. At a basic
level, South African cabernets, syrahs, and merlots are unfussy, straightforward wines,
often with a smoky character balanced by cherry, plum, and coffee flavors. Higher-priced,
higher-quality South African reds are a different story. Wines like Anwilka (a syrah-
cabernet blend), Saxenburg’s Private Collection Shiraz, or Mullineux’s Syrah are
sophisticated, classy, and could easily be mistaken for high-quality French wines.

                              THE NEDERBURG AUCTION
    Held each September in Paarl, the Nederburg Auction of rare Cape wines is one of the leading wine
    auctions in the world, along with Burgundy’s Hospices de Beaune, Germany’s Kloster Eberbach, and
    Napa Valley’s Auction Napa Valley. The first Nederburg Auction, which was held in 1975, was intended
    both as a showcase for South African wine and as an incentive for vintners to produce higher-quality
    wine. Today, the Nederburg Auction is actually two separate auction events—one for the public, and the
    other a commercial auction, which can only be attended by wine producers. Three community-based
    charities are the beneficiaries.

   And then there’s pinotage. Produced almost nowhere else in the world, pinotage was
created in 1925 when Cape cinsaut was genetically crossed with pinot noir in a South
African laboratory. The grape was first bottled by the Stellenbosch Farmers’ Winery in
1959. Today, pinotage has a sort of second-class status in South Africa, and many
examples, made without a lot of care or attention to cleanliness, taste lackluster at best
(and are packed with brettanomyces—see page 112).
   While it may seem surprising, South Africa produces a small quantity of tasty sparkling
wines made by the traditional (Champagne) method. South Africa’s official name for these
traditional-method sparklers is Cap Classique. They are usually made from chardonnay,
pinot noir, and pinot meunier, although sometimes from a blend that includes sauvignon
blanc and chenin blanc.
                   THE FOODS OF SOUTH AFRICA

Once, as a young child, I saw a vivid photo in National Geographic of a South African
ostrich egg. It was frighteningly large. Around it were even more frightening-looking
tribesmen. On my first trip to South Africa’s wine regions, I wondered if I’d be eating
anything other than ostrich omelets. In fact, Cape cooking goes far beyond egg dishes. The
culinary bold strokes are a curious blend of Dutch, English, and Malay cookery, Malays
having been brought to the earliest Cape settlements as slaves.
   Well-loved dishes include bredie, a humble Malay stew often made with lamb neck
bones and waterblommetjie, water lilies. These are a popular South African vegetable and
taste like a cross between artichokes and green beans. They grow wild on the surface of
roadside ponds. Somewhat more exciting than bredie is bobotie, best described as Malay
shepherd’s pie. In the tastiest boboties, chopped meat is spiked with cinnamon, curry, and
raisins, and it is frequently served with a chutney of dried peaches and apricots.
   South Africa is, not surprisingly, a land of extraordinary game. All sorts of deer and
antelope are roasted and made into pies. During the famous South African braai (rhymes
with cry), a traditional, outdoor Sunday barbecue, an amazing number of meats are grilled
—guinea fowl, several types of antelope and deer, plus pork, Karoo lamb, beef, and
ostrich, which tastes remarkably like sirloin steak but is leaner and lower in fat than
chicken. (The Cape alone has almost three hundred ostrich farms.) In the wine regions, the
meats are grilled over a fire fueled with branches pruned from grapevines. A braai may
also include potjiekos (pot food), layers of vegetables, onions, and beef, cooked all
afternoon in a pot over the fire; and potbrood, bread baked in a cast-iron pot over the fire.
   In restaurants, the bread that is virtually always served is a sprouted wheat bread that
harkens back to the Cape’s Dutch heritage. Any number of dishes will be accompanied by
chips (potato chips) or slap chips (French fries).
   Poised as it is between two oceans, South Africa is famed for its seafood, including
what outsiders call South African lobster tails and the South Africans call crayfish. Both
are incorrect. The creature in question is actually a type of spiny lobster with a wide tail
but no claws. Then there are perlemoen (abalone), mussels, calamari, clams, oysters, and
several kinds of deep-sea fish, such as snoek (pronounced snook), a large fish related to
the barracuda family. Smoked snoek pâté shows up everywhere.
    South African desserts are humble—even now in keeping with the customs of the
earliest settlers, for whom things like cream, chocolate, and fresh fruit were rarities. The
two homiest desserts are koeksusters (a dish that definitely requires careful pronunciation)
—deep-fried dough, recooked in sugar syrup—and milk tarts, essentially rich pastry tarts
filled with cinnamon-spiked milk custard.
On South Africa’s beloved public holiday—National Braai Day (September 24)—just about every meat you can think of
                                             gets thrown on the grill.


                        WHEN YOU VISIT… SOUTH AFRICA
          MOST OF THE TOP MOST OF THE TOP wine estates in South Africa are located in
          the Coastal Region, an easy drive from Cape Town. Many of them have beautifully
          restored buildings in the whitewashed Cape Dutch style, tasting rooms, and exciting
          restaurants. In fact, some of the best restaurants in the Coastal Region are part of
          wineries, and the Franschhoek Valley is often called the culinary capital of the Cape.
          IF YOU HAVE TIME to visit just one winery, consider making it Groot Constantia. Groot
          (the word means large) Constantia, with its classic Cape Dutch architecture, embodies
          South Africa of the past, while its sister winery next door, Klein (which means little)
          Constantia is a good example of the modern wine-making now taking place in South
          Africa.
                  The South African Wines to Know
                                                 WHITES




                                                FAIRVIEW
                                      SAUVIGNON BLANC | DARLING
                                            100% sauvignon blanc
The vivid, briny, oceanic aroma of Fairview’s remarkably inexpensive sauvignon blanc reminds me of cracking
open a fresh, minerally oyster. But then waves of other cooling aromas and flavors follow—limes, snowpeas,
grapefruits, guava, hedgerows, and that distinctive gunflint character that so many South African sauvignons
possess. Fairview is owned by the Back family, originally immigrants from Lithuania who arrived in South Africa
in 1902.
                                                 NEIL ELLIS
                                   SAUVIGNON BLANC | GROENEKLOOF
                                             100% sauvignon blanc
Decades ago, some of the original Neil Ellis sauvignon blancs were bullet trains of outrageous, smoky green
flavors. But the winery has matured and its style has evolved. Now these sauvignons are among the most lovely and
sophisticated in South Africa. They open with fresh mineral flavors and then take on a crisp, salty, tangy character
(rather like good Sancerre), and finally finish with an ever-so-gentle creaminess. The vines that produce the grapes
for this wine are planted in decomposed red granite as “bush vines” (without trellising).




                              HAMILTON RUSSELL VINEYARDS
                                CHARDONNAY | HEMEL-EN-AARDE VALLEY
                                                100% chardonnay
A wonderful example of a full-bodied, New World–style chardonnay, with custard and crème brûlée-like flavors
and a toasty, nutty edge. And while the wine is palate-coating and long, a background of crisp citrus and fresh pear
notes keeps the creaminess in check. One of the most southerly wine estates in Africa, and one of the closest to the
sea, Hamilton Russell is located in the cool, maritime Hemel-en-Aarde Valley, just behind the old fishing village of
Hermanus, southeast of Cape Town.
                                              DEMORGENZON
                                       CHENIN BLANC | WESTERN CAPE
                                                 100% chenin blanc
In a sea of commercial chenin blancs, this one from DeMorgenzon is an artisanal beauty. The rich, caramel-apple
flavors are laced with notes of whipped cream, roasted nuts, spices, and sea salt. A beautiful crispness underlies the
wine, lifting it up and giving it incredible vibrancy. And don’t miss the lush DeMorgenzon chardonnay, another of
the winery’s several exemplary wines. Owners Wendy and Hylton Appelbaum pipe Baroque music through their
vineyards twenty-four hours a day, believing that the music exerts a powerful positive influence on the ripening
process. The winery is named after DeMorgenzon, a small, high-altitude area (now the location of one of its
vineyards) that is the first place within the Stellenbosch Valley to see the sun each day. DeMorgenzon means “the
morning sun” in Afrikaans.

                                                      REDS




                                                 MULLINEUX
                                              SYRAH | SWARTLAND
                                                     100% syrah
Mullineux’s fantastic syrah could easily appear in a blind tasting of Rhône Valley syrahs and never be caught out.
Wildly gamy, smoky, and peppery, it’s packed with the vivid charcuterie flavors that many syrah lovers go mad for.
But that’s just for openers. Next, loads of briary chaparral flavors appear, plus notes of resiny sage, dried lavender,
and black licorice. Yet for all this unleashed, untamed wildness, the wine also has a rich core of soft blackberry
fruit. Like most great syrahs, this one loves to unwind in the presence of oxygen, so it will be even more charming
if poured from a decanter. Husband and wife Chris and Andrea Mullineux (their surname is an adaptation of
Moulineaux, French for “water mill”) are both winemakers.
                                                  ANWILKA
                                                 STELLENBOSCH
                               48% shiraz, 42% cabernet sauvignon, 10% merlot
Quite possibly the single best red of South Africa, Anwilka has a majestic structure and is a distinctive synthesis of
two great grapes (with a little merlot thrown in to knit the flavors together). From the cabernet, the wine gets its
rich, red currant, green tobacco, and black plum aromas and flavors. From the syrah come sweet, meaty flavors,
like skirt steak sitting in a pool of meat juices. Begun in the late 1990s, the winery had an impeccably talented team
of owners: Lowell Jooste (the former co-owner of Klein Constantia), Hubert de Boüard (co-owner of Bordeaux’s
Château Angélus, in Saint-Emilion), and Bruno Prats (former owner of Bordeaux’s Château Cos d’Estournel, in
Saint-Estèphe). All three men remain involved with the project, although Anwilka has since merged with Klein
Constantia and has new owners: Czech-born Zdeněk Bakala, a United States investment banker, and Charles
Harman, a British investment banker.

                                             SWEET WINES
                                                  MULLINEUX
                                           STRAW WINE | SWARTLAND
                                                  100% chenin blanc
The chenin blanc grapes for this artisanal wine come from thirty-plus-year-old vines growing in stony schist and
shale soils on Riebeek Kastel Mountain, and forty-plus-year-old vines growing in decomposed granite soils on
Paardeberg Mountain. The young husband-and-wife winemaking team of Chris and Andrea Mullineux place the
harvested grapes on racks outdoors and allow them to dry and partially shrivel in the South African sun for three
weeks. The result is an exquisite straw wine that is a poem to apricots—not to mention to orange marmalade,
quince, and papaya. The wine’s dizzying vividness keeps it remarkably light and fresh on the palate, setting it apart
from many sweet wines.




                                           KLEIN CONSTANTIA
                                      VIN DE CONSTANCE | CONSTANTIA
                                            100% muscat de Frontignan
Klein Constantia (Little Constantia) is part of the famous Constantia wine estate founded in 1685. Constantia has
historically been known for Vin de Constance, a luscious dessert wine made from muscat blanc à petits grains
grapes (known as muscat de Frontignan in South Africa). The wine rose to become one of the most sought-after
dessert wines in all of Europe, ordered by the case by Napoléon Bonaparte. And the wine remains extraordinary
today. To begin, the color is unreal. Filaments of orange and amber light glint off the surface of the wine like tiny
bolts of lightning. The ethereal apricot sweetness and citrus-skin bitterness detonate on the palate, then seem to
float up in clouds of lingering richness. Yet for all its opulence, Klein Constantia is impossibly light and fresh. It is
wine as a halo.
The shaded areas of this map indicate entire areas where wine is made. The actual vineyard areas are smaller and
                                           scattered throughout them.
                                                                                                     ASIA

                                        CHINA | JAPAN | INDIA
Asia’s modern wine industries have sprung on the scene so quickly and, in some cases, are
evolving so fast that they almost defy a book author’s ability to write about them. Yet wine
is produced in China, Japan, and India, as well as in rather astonishing places such as
Thailand, Vietnam, Iran, Taiwan, Myanmar, Cambodia, Korea, and even Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, and several of the other “stans.” In the pages that follow, I have done my best
to explore Asia’s three main wine-producing countries, for these are places—China
especially—that knowledgeable wine drinkers will increasingly want to know about. No
entity has stated the case more succinctly than the prestigious London-based wine firm
Berry Brothers & Rudd, which predicts that within fifty years, the quality of Chinese wine
will rival that of Bordeaux.




   Female construction workers carry rocks on their backs in Yunnan Province, one of China’s newer wine regions.
The shaded areas of this map indicate entire provinces where wine is made. The actual vineyard areas are smaller and
                                          scattered throughout the province.
CHINA

A decade ago, most wine drinkers in the Western world rarely would have come across the
words China and wine in the same sentence. Times have changed. As of 2012, China was
already, in volume, the fifth leading wine-consuming nation, according to the OIV
(L’Organisation Internationale de la Vigne et du Vin), the intergovernmental organization
that tracks global wine statistics. That, perhaps, was not entirely surprising; China, with
fully 19 percent of the world’s population, is the most populous country on earth. But the
fact that, by 2012, China was also fifth in world wine production—now, that was
something almost no Westerner saw coming.
   For all of its newness on the modern wine scene, China has had a long history of wine-
making. Numerous archaeological findings have revealed evidence of an ancient wine
culture here, and in the mid-1990s, a joint American-Chinese archaeological team
uncovered yet more evidence—this time, dating wine production in Shandong Province
back to 2500 B.C. At two sites near the city of Rizhao, more than two hundred clay vessels
contained the residue of wines made from grapes, as well as from rice and from honey
(mead).
   But by the end of the Bronze Age in China (around 700 B.C.) grape-based wines
(known as pútáojiˇu) had been almost completely overshadowed by a range of alcoholic
beverages made from grains like millet and sorghum and from fruits like lychees and
Asian plums, and these beverages remained cultural mainstays until modern times. Even
as of the 1970s, China was a devoted beer- and spirits-drinking society. The World Health
Organization estimated that beer and spirits made up 99 percent of alcohol consumed in
China in 1970. Today, along with beer, the two most popular alcoholic drinks are baijiu
and huangjiu. The first, distilled principally from sorghum, is the world’s most consumed
spirit, and, at 40 to 60 percent alcohol by volume, packs a powerful punch. The second,
popularly known as “yellow wine,” is usually fermented from rice and millet.
   How, then, to account for the current explosion of the modern Chinese grape-wine
industry? Here is an extremely brief sketch of China’s history, to put that wine revolution
in context.
    The Chinese Empire was established around 221 B.C., when the Qin Dynasty first
conquered several states and peoples, uniting them into a single entity. Numerous
dynasties followed, over the next two thousand plus years, until 1911, when the Republic
of China overthrew the last dynasty, the Qing Dynasty (also known as the Manchu
Dynasty), which had ruled since 1644. The Republic of China went on to govern the
mainland until 1949. After the defeat of the Empire of Japan in World War II, the Republic
of China devolved into fractious internal fighting between its two main parties—the
Communist Party and the Kuomintang nationalist party. The Communist Party prevailed,
forming the People’s Republic of China (PRC) in Beijing on October 1, 1949 (the
Kuomintang relocated the Republic of China government to Taiwan). In 1978, the PRC
initiated a series of major economic reforms, as a result of which China has become one of
the world’s fastest-growing major economies.
    In the 2000s, China’s rapid modernization shifted into warp speed. Living standards
among the country’s 1.35 billion people soared, and the percentage of wealthy Chinese
skyrocketed. (Of the ten countries with the most millionaires, China is third—after the
U.S. and Japan—and Taiwan ranks seventh; Hong Kong, tenth.) With their burgeoning
wealth, Chinese consumers grew increasingly fascinated by Western culture, Western
lifestyle, and Western luxury goods. The stage was set for fine wine.
   Since 2008, China’s almost over-the-top passion for wine has been head-spinning.

                                        THE NAME CHINA
    The word China             is derived from the Persian word Chin           , which is the Sanskrit word

    Cīna         . It was first recorded in 1516, in the journal of the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa,
    and later translated into English by Richard Eden, in 1555. It is commonly thought that the word is
    derived from the name of the Qin Dynasty, the first imperial dynasty of China, lasting from 221 to 206
    B.C.

WINE CONSUMPTION        doubled in five years between 2008 and 2013.
IN 2011, A CHINESE BUYER  paid a record $541,000 for twenty-five cases of Château Lafite
Rothschild at a Christie’s auction.
CHINA IS ON TARGET      to be the world’s largest consumer of wine by volume as of 2016.
ACKER MERRALL & CONDIT,    the world’s largest auction house for wine, set 483 new world
records in Hong Kong for the prices paid for wines sold at auction in 2013. The majority
of these new records were related to the sale of Burgundy wines, as Hong Kong has, since
2011, become the most important auction market worldwide for both Bordeaux and
Burgundy.
   As for its own domestic production, the statistics are equally stunning. From 2000 to
2012, wine production in China nearly doubled, to 393 million gallons (14.9 million
hectoliters). That made China, as noted, fifth in the world in wine production. Importantly,
these statistics come from the authoritative OIV, which counts only grape wine
production. (Independent Chinese statistics are next to impossible to come by, and those
that are available don’t appear to distinguish between wine made from grapes and wine
made from rice or from other fruits like plums.) But even the OIV numbers must be taken
with a grain of salt, for there’s another problem, too—and it exists everywhere in Asia.
The wine that producers bottle (and thus the wine that is counted as “production”) doesn’t
come from Chinese grapes exclusively. China, like all Asian wine-producing countries,
buys a considerable amount of bulk wine and grape concentrate from its Pacific Rim
neighbors, Australia, South America, and North America, not to mention from parts of
Europe as well. As a result, Chinese wine production—while certainly enormous—is not
entirely related to Chinese-grown grapes.
          LOST IN TRANSLATION—THE CASSIS CONUNDRUM
 In the late 1990s, my wine classes in California often included a handful of students from Asia. They
 were studious, attentive, and polite. But the teacher in me knew something wasn’t clicking. Finally one
 young Chinese man confided he’d never tasted a raspberry or blackberry in his life, and by the way, what
 was cassis? For days, I’d been comparing the flavor of wines to fruits, flowers, and foods he’d never
 even heard of.
    For wine professionals in the Asian headquarters of the big auction houses, such as Sotheby’s and
 Christie’s, the lack of a universal wine language is painfully apparent. Not only is it next to impossible to
 translate the names of European wineries into Chinese characters based on the Mandarin
 pronunciations of the syllables in the names, but tasting notes written by European wine experts often
 make no sense to Chinese buyers. Accordingly, some Chinese wine experts have now begun the
 daunting task of reinterpreting the descriptions of famous wines using locally understood flavors. So, a
 great Burgundy? Forget the cherries and earth. Think, a hint of dang gui (a traditional Chinese medicinal
 herb), a suggestion of fermented cabbage, and maybe some notes of Chiuchow stock (an aromatic, soy-
 based liquid for poaching meats).

   The Chinese wine industry is currently made up of approximately seven hundred
wineries that fall into two camps: extremely large producers of inexpensive, utterly basic
wine (companies such as Dynasty, China Great Wall, and Changyu) and newer estates
making expensive wines targeted at affluent Chinese consumers (in 2012, Chateau
Hansen, based on the edge of the Gobi Desert, in Inner Mongolia, released the first
vintage of its top cabernet sauvignon—called Red Camel—for just under $700 a bottle).
As for quality, the cheap wines from the very large producers have mostly verged on
dismal. Wines from the cutting-edge wineries are far better. Indeed, some of these wines
are so good they could easily pass for a California or Bordeaux wine in a blind tasting.
   China’s love affair with fine wine began as, and remains, mostly a love affair with
Bordeaux and Burgundy (the Chinese mania for Château Lafite-Rothschild has no equal,
and the Domaine de la Romanée-Conti could easily sell its entire production here).
Accordingly, many of the newer, high-end wineries are aesthetically influenced by France.
Some, for example, are designed to look like Bordeaux châteaux and have the word
château in their names; others are French-Chinese joint ventures. A prominent example is
a partnership announced in 2009 between Château Lafite-Rothschild and Citic Group
(China’s largest state-owned investment company), to make wine in Shandong Province.
Another is the joint venture between Champagne producer Moët Hennessy and SOE
Nongken, which resulted in a $5.5 million sparkling wine facility (and impressive wine) in
Ningxia in 2013.
 All over China, impressive wineries (and the roads to them) are being built by tens of thousands of people working
around the clock. Wine regions that would have taken centuries to develop in Europe have often sprung up within five
                                                  years in China.
     THE LAND, THE GRAPES, AND THE VINEYARDS

At 3.7 million square miles (9.6 million square kilometers), China is the fourth largest
country on Earth. Its borders stretch from its 9,000 miles (14,500 kilometers) of Pacific
Ocean coastline in the east to the border with Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Pakistan, 3,100
miles (5,000 kilometers) away in the west. In the north, China touches Russia, Mongolia,
and Kazakhstan, and in the south, the (contested) Chinese territory of Tibet lies along the
border with India. Within this vast country are some twenty-two provinces, five
autonomous regions, and two self-governing special administrative regions (Hong Kong
and Macau).
   Collectively, these possess virtually every type of climate and geography—from
subtropical forests to subarctic scrubland, and from flat deserts to some of the tallest
mountains in the world (the Himalayas include ten of the tallest mountain peaks on earth).
As you can imagine, much of the country is either too muggy and hot (monsoons are a
problem) or too excruciatingly cold to sustain viticulture. Even in several existing wine
regions, vines must be “weather-protected”—that is, banked up with soil in winter to
prevent the roots and some of the trunk tissue from being fatally damaged by deep freezes.
In parts of Inner Mongolia and Ningxia, where vines must often survive temperatures as
low as –20ºF (–29°C), a local viti-cultural technique goes a step further. Called deep-ditch
cultivation, it starts with vines planted in trenches 3 to 5 feet (.9 to 1.5 meters) deep. Each
year, soil is added to the trench in order to more deeply bury the newest roots, which are
closest to the surface of the land. Meanwhile, the deepest, main roots are progressively
buried deeper and deeper, allowing them to resist the damage caused by subzero soil
temperatures.




Women tending the roses at Changyu Global Winery outside of Bejing. All over China’s wine regions, women do a large
                                 share of the agricultural and landscaping work.
   As of 2012, vineyards were spread over 1.41 million acres (570,600 hectares) in China
(double the area in 2000). By comparison, Spain had 2.5 million acres (1 million hectares,
the world’s most); France, 1.97 million acres (797,200 hectares); while the U.S., with 1
million acres (404,700 hectares), had fewer than China. (But here’s a critically important
fact: The vineyard acreage for China includes table grapes—not just wine grapes.
   China’s vineyards are planted with only a small number of grape varieties that would
be recognized in the West. New plantings are often of red grapes (a culturally preferred
color), including cabernet sauvignon, merlot, cabernet franc, syrah, and what is called
cabernet gernischt (DNA profiling reveals this to be identical to carmenère) for still wines
and pinot noir for sparkling wines. Among whites, chardonnay (largely for sparkling
wines) is planted along with a small amount of chenin blanc, sémillon, and a few other
whites. Cold-climate varieties such as rkatsiteli and saperavi, both successful in Russia
and the Republic of Georgia, are also planted. In addition to these classic wine grapes, a
number of table grapes are planted and used for wine, including muscat Hamburg, niunai
(“cow’s nipples”), kyoho, Thompson seedless, and longyan (“dragon eyes”). And new
hybrid grape varieties are being developed to withstand central and northern China’s
brutal winters.
   As of this writing, China does not have a formal system of delineating appellations.
(Because of that, most of the key wine regions are actually administrative provinces.) The
top wine regions are clustered in five parts of the country:
THE NORTHEAST    (including the wine regions Shandong, Hebei, Beijing, Tianjin, Liaoning,
Jilin, and Shanxi)
EAST CENTRAL   (Ningxia Hui and Gansu)
NORTH CENTRAL   (Inner Mongolia)
FAR WEST   (Xinjiang Uyghur)
FAR SOUTH   (Yunnan and Sichuan)
  Here are brief notes on each, as well as wineries located in each. (Note that many
wineries have a presence in several regions.)

SHANDONG PROVINCE
Located on the Shandong Peninsula, on Bohai Bay in northeastern China, Shandong has a
maritime climate and, despite summer storms, is fairly well suited to European Vitis
vinifera grapes. This is China’s main wine region by both volume and value of the wines
produced, and it was the first well-established region in the modern Chinese wine era.
Importantly, this is where Château Lafite Rothschild established its joint venture with the
state-owned investment firm Citic Group, and there are a number of other cutting-edge
wineries (Chateau Reifeng-Auzias and Qingdao Great River Hill Winery) as well as large
players like Changyu Pioneer Wine Company and China’s largest wine producer, the
China Great Wall Wine Company.

HEBEI PROVINCE
Relatively near Shandong, and also benefiting from a maritime climate thanks to Bohai
Bay, Hebei is China’s second region in terms of sales. This is where some of the first dry
whites and dry reds were made. Historically, off-dry reds made from longyan table grapes
were also local specialties. Well-known wineries here include China Great Wall Wine
Company, Chateau SunGod, Chateau Red Leaf, and Sheng Tang Winery.

BEIJING
Beijing is geographically located within Hebei Province, but it is considered its own
“direct controlled” municipality. Because of Beijing’s prominence as the political and
cultural capital of China, it has attracted small wineries with strong orientations to wine
tourism. However, if land were not scarce, this could well be an important larger wine
region, for the climate is fairly dry and sunny in summer. Wineries include Dragon Seal,
Chateau Bolongbao, and Fengshou Wine Co.

TIANJIN
Located just south of Beijing, Tianjin is well known as the location of one of the first
Chinese-French joint ventures—the Sino-French Joint-Venture Dynasty Winery Ltd.
(Cognac producer Rémy Martin was the French partner). Opened in 1980, the company
makes wines and brandies. The Dynasty wines, as they are simply known, have been
served at countless Chinese state banquets.

LIAONING PROVINCE
North of Beijing, on the border with North Korea, Liaoning Province is known, amazingly
enough, for icewines made from Vidal grapes in the Golden Ice Wine Valley, notably by
the wine company Changyu. Otherwise, the province is one of China’s most industrial,
with heavy industries built on iron, steel, coal mining, petroleum, and natural gas.

JILIN PROVINCE
Jilin Province, located north of Liaoning, in what was once called Manchuria, is known
for native grapes of the species Vitis amurensis. This species of grapes is amazingly cold-
tolerant, and thus has been the source of plant-breeding material for Chinese scientists
hoping to cross it with Vitis vinifera varieties. Wineries include Tonghua Grape Wine Co.
and Changbaishan Wine Holding Co.

SHANXI PROVINCE
Vineyards here are concentrated in the Taiyuan Basin, and the wineries are small. But
Shanxi rose to fame on the success of Grace Vineyard, perhaps China’s first “cult winery.”
Founded in 1997 by industrialist C. K. Chan, Grace Vineyard was taken over by Chan’s
daughter, Judy Chan Leissner, when she was just twenty-four years old. Grace Vineyards
makes more than a dozen wines, including cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, and merlot,
the vines for which were brought in from a Bordeaux nursery. The top wine—called
Chairman’s Reserve—is a mainstay on expensive hotel and restaurant wine lists in China.
In addition to Grace Vineyard, Shanxi is the location of another high-end winery—
Chateau Rongzi. Founded in 2007, Rongzi achieved almost instant credibility by
convincing Jean-Claude Berrouet (former winemaker of Bordeaux’s ultrafamous Château
Petrus) to be its wine consultant.

NINGXIA HUI AUTONOMOUS REGION
Sometimes referred to as the Napa of China, Ningxia (as it is simply known) has a
semiarid climate conducive to growing grapes, and water from the nearby Yellow River
provides irrigation. Considerable investment in the region—both by wineries large and
small and by the Chinese government in the form of infrastructure—have placed Ningxia
(especially the region within it, known as Helan Mountain East Foothills) at the top of the
hierarchy of China’s most impressive wine regions. Wineries here include Moët
Hennessy’s Chandon China (the first Chinese sparkling wine house), Helan Qingxue, Zhi
Hui Yuan Shi, Silver Heights, Lux Regis, Domaine de Arômes, Chateau Yunmo, Chateau
Changyu Moser XV, Lanny Chateau, Domaine Helan Mountain, and many others.




The ornate gates outside the city of Yinchuan, the capital of Ningxia, which intends to be the “Napa Valley of China” by
                                                           2020.


GANSU PROVINCE
A fairly isolated, cool region, Gansu has several wineries, although the province is not
thought to be among those with the most promising futures. Ripening can be a difficult
process here. The main wineries include Mogao Winery, Qilian Wine Company, Zixuan
Wine, and Grand Dragon.
                    THE DARK SIDE: COUNTERFEIT WINES
 In the 2000s, the Chinese frenzy to buy ultra-expensive wines created another sort of frenzy—a
 whirlwind counterfeit industry, more extensive and skilled than anything that has ever before existed in
 the global wine industry. As of 2013, industry analysts estimated that as much as 50 percent of the
 foreign wine sold in China may have been fake. Certain individuals among a small army of Chinese
 bottle scavengers (aka “professional bottle recyclers”) have been known to pay over $300 for a single
 empty bottle of Château Lafite-Rothschild or Château Pétrus. After their tasting events, auction houses in
 China now routinely smash empty bottles with a hammer, to prevent the bottles from ending up on the
 black market and being refilled with cheap wine or worse, a concoction of citric acid, flavoring essence,
 and food coloring. Of course, skillful counterfeiters have also taken another tack. Instead of using
 authentic bottles with real labels, many have simply bought facsimile bottles and then replicated the
 labels of great estates, dispersing the fakes among genuine bottles in wine shops all over Asia.




  Gansu Province, on the ancient “Silk Road” of central China, has a small number of wineries, though the rugged
                                    terrain and hot climate present challenges.


INNER MONGOLIA
Inner Mongolia has a long history of raisin production and winemaking, especially in the
area near Wuhai. The days during the short growing season are hot; the nights, cold.
Sunlight is intense and humidity is low. So far so good. But the extremely cold, snowless
winter means that the ground freezes hard and deep. As a result, much of the leading
research on winter-hardy grape varieties and cold-climate viticultural techniques like
deep-ditch cultivation have happened here. As is easily imagined, researchers in Inner
Mongolia are also at the forefront of developing new, extremely cold-tolerant hybrids,
especially of grapes belonging to the species Vitis vinifera and Vitis amurensis (thus far,
the resulting grape varieties have been given names like Red Wine Grape #1 and Inner
Mongolia #1). There also exists here a fascinating Vitis vinifera variety called Tuo Xian,
thought to be one of the most cold-tolerant vinifera varieties in existence. Its pink berries
and huge, foot-long clusters are amazing, but the wine from these grapes is rather basic.
Finally, Inner Mongolia is known for a special drink—Tuo Xian white wine infused with
fresh flowers of the Osmanthus fragrans shrub. The drink, said to have a strong, floral
cherry aroma, is usually sweet and is served as a highly aromatic dessert wine. Among the
top wineries here are Chateau Hansen, Viction Winery, and In the Clouds Winery.




    Wa Ta Si—The Temple of the Five Pagodas in Inner Mongolia, where there is a long history of winemaking.


XINJIANG UYGHUR AUTONOMOUS REGION
Originally famous for its raisins (frequently used culinarily by the largely Muslim
population), Xinjiang (as it is simply known) now has the largest wine grape production in
China. The region—in far western China—is extremely remote, and while vineyard
acreage has grown quickly over the past several years, transporting products out of the
region is difficult and expensive. Still, it was through Xinjiang—one of the ancient Silk
Road transit points—that Vitis vinifera vines (and many foods) came into China from
Europe. The region is also noteworthy for a special drink of the Uyghur people
—musailaisi wine. Local Vitis vinifera table grapes (munage and hashihaer) are cooked
with roses, wild berries, saffron, and cloves, along with (sometimes) velvet antler, pigeon
blood, and roasted lamb. After cooking, the mixture is strained, poured into jars, and
allowed to ferment for about forty days. Brownish in color, and both sweet and bitter,
musailaisi is considered to have very positive health benefits, and it certainly seems like
an antidote to a cold night on the edge of Mongolia. But of course, it is also a treasured
part of the local Uyghur heritage, and to accept some upon being offered a cup is to be a
courteous (not to mention adventurous) guest.
  Main wineries in Xinjiang include Citic Guoan Wine, Xinjiang Xiangdu Winery,
Chateau Loulan, Niya, Skyline of Gobi, Château Zhongfei Winery, China Great Wall
Wine Company, and others.

YUNNAN PROVINCE AND SICHUAN PROVINCE
The two wine provinces of Yunnan and Sichuan are often mentioned together because of
their proximity along the border with Tibet. Despite their low latitude in southern China,
both regions have altitude in their favor. Altitude with a capital A. Vineyards here on the
10,000-foot (3,000-meter) Diqing Plateau are more than twice as high as the highest
vineyards in the foothills of the Andes in Argentina. Thus, the climate in these provinces
tends to be cool. Also because of altitude, both areas benefit from intense luminosity,
leading to efficient photosynthesis and ripe grapes. The hilly terrain is a challenge,
however, so vineyards exist as small fields dotting the mountains, rather than large tracts
of land. Yunnan and Sichuan are very new wine regions in China, but they have attracted a
considerable amount of investment. Wineries include the Shangri-La Winery, the Spirit of
Highland Winery, Kangding Hong Winery, Hongxing Leader Winery, and AoYun by Moët
Hennessy.




Walking among the tall flowers in Yunnan Province. Some vineyards in the province are planted at an altitude of 10,000
                                                feet (3,000 meters).
The shaded areas of this map indicate entire prefectures where wine is made. The actual vineyard areas are smaller and
                                          scattered throughout the prefecture.
JAPAN

Considered one of the most gastronomically sophisticated countries in the world, Japan
was the first Asian country to fully embrace European wines and develop a strong
connoisseurship of them. In contrast to China, where wine education is growing but still in
its infancy, Japan boasts countless wine schools, numerous wine experts, a flourishing
wine book industry, and a thriving sommelier association (ten thousand strong). Indeed, as
far back as 1995, Japanese sommelier Shinya Tasaki was named the most knowledgeable
and skillful sommelier in the world when he won the Sommelier World Championship.
   Thanks to their strong affinity for Western luxury goods (including fine wine), Japan
and China do share spiraling wine consumption. Between 2000 and 2013, Japan’s total
wine consumption increased 28 percent, according to the OIV, although, on a per-person,
per-year basis, the amount remains relatively small. Yet Japanese consumption has
historically been somewhat higher than Chinese consumption (.72 gallons/2.73 liters per
capita in Japan versus .35 gallons/1.32 liters per capita in China).
   In fact, for many urban Japanese, the culture of consuming wine is now fully integrated
into modern living. Imported wines from across the world and of every level of quality are
now widely available at diverse locations from high-end restaurants and standing wine
bars to conveyor-belt sushi restaurants, convenience stores, and roadside vending
machines.
   But despite its early and avid adoption of imported wine, Japan has struggled to
establish its own domestic wine industry—and for good reason. At 145,925 square miles
(377,900 square kilometers; about the size of Norway), the Japanese archipelago is made
up of 6,852 islands that sit between a huge landmass (China) and a huge body of water
(the Pacific Ocean). As a result, Japan is buffeted by erratic extremes of climate. When it
isn’t freezing cold, it’s often humid or rainy. Indeed, Siberian winds and typhoons (along
with occasional monsoons and hurricanes) all take their toll—often during the growing
season or at harvest time. And then there’s the topography itself. Japan, the product of
volcanoes, is so steeply mountainous that little usable land is available. Take some of that
for cities and towns to support the dense (126 million) population, and some of it for other
types of agriculture (such as rice), and what’s left for vineyards is tiny and massively
expensive, if it’s even suitable for viticulture. Yet, for all of this, Japan does have a
domestic wine industry, and we will explore it in a moment.

                                        THE NAME JAPAN
    The English word Japan derives from the Chinese pronunciation of the Japanese name,        , which in
    Japanese is pronounced Nippon (formally) or Nihon (more casually). Japanese people refer to themselves
    as Nihonjin             and to their language as Nihongo              . Both Nippon and Nihon mean
    “sun-origin,” and are often translated as Land of the Rising Sun.

   It is commonly believed that the first wines were brought to Japan in the sixteenth
century by Portuguese Jesuit missionaries, as gifts for the feudal lords of Kyushu.
However, the modern wine industry takes its beginnings from the 1860s, during the so-
called Meiji Restoration, when the state was centralized under one emperor, and Japan
began to seek out Western ideas and emulate Western lifestyles. The consumption of
alcohol evolved to become a more regular custom, even for those outside the leisure
classes. Most importantly, the development of commercial agriculture other than rice (or
mulberry for the declining silk industry) became a focus. Establishing fruit grow-ing—and
later winemaking—became a stated national priority. The Japanese government sent
technicians to the United States and Europe to collect hundreds of grape varieties for trials
and to study winemaking practices. The amount of land planted with table grapes rapidly
expanded. In the Kofu Basin north of Mount Fuji in Yamanashi Prefecture, table grape
farmers using earthenware containers and second-hand sake tanks began fermenting their
harvested but unsold grapes to make wine for personal consumption. Many of these
operations were later legitimized to collect tax revenues, and thus began a small Japanese
wine industry. Mercian and Suntory—the two biggest producers in Yamanashi Prefecture
(still one of the most important locations for vineyards)—began making wines in 1877 and
1909, respectively.
   The grapes used during the late nineteenth century included koshu (more on this soon)
and hardy varieties grown in cold, wet areas on the East Coast of the United States, such
as the French-American hybrid Delaware and the American cross Niagara. Later, grapes
that could adapt to the Japanese climate were developed in Japan. The best known of these
—muscat Bailey A—is a red table grape developed in 1927 by Zenbei Kawakami, at the
Iwanohara Winery in Niigate Prefecture. A cross of Bailey and muscat Hamburg (both of
which are crosses themselves), muscat Bailey A produces a sweet, candy-ish, grape-juicy
red wine that is popular on the domestic market. Drier versions are often blended with
imported bulk wine (such as cabernet sauvignon and merlot) to make simple red wines.
(Like all Asian wine-producing countries, Japan imports a considerable amount of bulk
wine and grape concentrate.)
              The proud Mt. Fuji, which can be seen from the vineyards of Yamanashi Prefecture.

   By the 1970s and 1980s, however, Japan had at least some success in developing
sophisticated viticultural techniques that allowed for the production of Japanese-grown
merlot, chardonnay, and other popular Vitis vinifera varieties, even in humid conditions
and in areas without significant periods of sun. Among these techniques were planting
vines like hedges on steep mountain terraces for maximum sun exposure and constructing
high, elevated trellises or pergolas that kept the fruit as much as 10 feet (3 meters) off the
ground for maximum air ventilation. Alas, for the most part, both techniques encouraged
quantity over quality, and thus met with only partial success. As a result, in the last two
decades, grape-growing for fine wine continues to shift beyond traditional areas and
toward cool but sunnier and somewhat drier areas such as Nagano Prefecture and
Yamagata Prefecture, as well as on the far northern island of Hokkaido.
Nagano Prefecture, west of Tokyo, one of Japan’s newer wine regions. Here, the prefecture’s Matsumoto Castle, officially
                                           a “National Treasure of Japan.”

   One grape that has been quite successful in Yamanashi Prefecture, however, has been
koshu, a Vitis vinifera pinkish-hued, humidity-tolerant white grape with a long, somewhat
mysterious history in Japan. Before it was possible to identify grapes by DNA typing,
legend had it that koshu was a cross of a native, wild Japanese grape with a vinifera
variety brought from the Caucasus to China and then, approximately a thousand years ago,
by Buddhist monks, to Japan. But DNA typing has revealed no relationships with other
known varieties, and thus koshu’s origins remain unknown. Today, koshu is experiencing
a newfound popularity as the hip wine of young professionals. Still versions are dry,
delicate, and crisp (not unlike Muscadet), and there are sparkling versions as well, which I
find even more attractive.
    Ranking forty-seventh in the world in vineyard land, Japan has some 45,000 acres
(18,200 hectares) of vines, most of which are planted on two islands—Honshu, the largest
island, where Tokyo is located; and Hokkaido, the most northern island. The wine districts
of Honshu include the prefectures of Yamanashi, Nagano, and Yamagata. As noted, in
Yamanashi, southeast of Tokyo, most of the vineyards are planted in the Kofu Basin, with
spectacular views of Mount Fuji towering above. The growing season here is one of the
longest in Japan, and the relatively low level of rainfall is a huge asset (Mount Fuij
provides the convenient rain shadow effect). Nagano, northwest of the capital, is located
farther inland, on mountain foothills over 2,000 feet (600 meters) in altitude. Yamagata, in
the far northern part of Honshu, is a mountainous region facing the Sea of Japan. Despite
its humid summers, the autumns are dry, and the region has begun to produce good-quality
merlot and chardonnay. Then there’s Hokkaido, Japan’s northernmost and coldest island.
Despite the cold, it is fairly well suited to viticulture, in part because the growing season is
not dominated by bouts of rain. Interestingly, cool-climate grapes associated with northern
Italy, Germany, and Austria have done well here, including Kerner, Müller-Thurgau,
riesling, and Zweigelt.
Yamagata Prefecture is a wine region facing the Sea of Japan. Here, the prefecture’s Yamadera Temple, reachable by a
              thousand-step climb, is where the famous haiku poet Matsuo Bashōo wrote and worked.

   Finally, a few words about the structure of the domestic wine industry. Japanese vine-
yards—especially in the traditional areas—are usually small and owned by independent
growers, each of whom farms numerous non-contiguous, tiny plots of vines, along with
other crops. These farmers typically concentrate on higher-valued table grapes, but also
sell their wine grapes to large drinks companies which then ferment the grapes to make
Japanese wines sourced from Japanese grapes (often koshu). Though a source of local
pride, such wine is, however, only a small part of the total amount of wine produced in the
country, for large drinks companies such as Suntory, Mercian, Sapporo, and Asahi also
make wine from grape juice purchased on the international market.
When you need a bottle of wine, even the most humble shop will do.
INDIA

Whenever I imagine wine in India, I invariably picture British colonists during the Raj
(the word means “reign” in Hindi, and denotes the period between 1858 and 1947) sitting
under fans in the sweltering humidity, drinking Madeira and Port. But that image is only
one part of the complex, on-again-off-again story of wine on the Indian subcontinent.
   Viticulture in India has been estimated to date back as far as the fourth millennium B.C.,
when traders from Persia (modern-day Iran) are said to have introduced grapevines to the
subcontinent. The date would mean that Indian viticulture (although not necessarily wine
making) was established significantly earlier than viticulture in China, and the idea is
indeed conceivable. Biomolecular archaeologist Patrick McGovern’s considerable
findings on wine in the ancient world include Neolithic jars containing winelike residues
dating from 5400 to 5000 B.C. at the site of Hajji Firuz Tepe, in the Zagros Mountains of
Iran. It is possible that from there, grapevines were brought to the Indus Valley civilization
(an area that extends from what is today northeast Afghanistan to Pakistan and northwest
India) between 3300 and 1300 B.C. The Indus Valley civilization is considered one of the
three great early civilizations of the Old World, along with Ancient Eygpt and
Mesopotamia.
   Evidence specifically of winemaking comes much later in India, however. As of the
fourth century B.C. (just two hundred years after wine began to be made in France), grape-
based wines known as madhu were among the popular indulgences of the Emperor
Chandragupta Maurya, and were chronicled, along with the emperor’s revelries, by his
chief minister, Chanakya. Wine became, as it did in Europe, the drink of the privileged
and noble classes, while the poor drank alcoholic beverages made from millet, barley, and
wheat.
   But India soon entered one of its many anti-alcohol eras. During the otherwise
enlightened and artistic era known as the Muslim Mughal Empire (A.D. 1526 to
approximately 1700), wine was banned in accordance with Islamic teachings. It wasn’t
until the British Raj, during the Victorian era, that views on alcohol made an about-face.
Vineyards were planted throughout the Baramati, Kashmir, and Surat regions and
winemaking was strongly encouraged, largely so that British colonists would have a
domestic supply, lest the imported Madeira run out.
   But just as it was reaching some measure of critical mass, at the end of the nineteenth
century, the wine industry in India was devastated by phylloxera. In the early part of the
twentieth century, the industry barely recovered, and it didn’t help that another growing
temperance movement in India resulted in several Indian states banning all alcohol
outright.
   Still, by the 1970s, India, like many of its Asian neighbors, had a growing middle class
for whom wine was a sign of Westernization and sophistication. A new, modern wine era
began. In the mid-1980s, in the state of Goa, for example, the Tonia Group (originally
producers of fennys—high-alcohol spirits distilled from coconuts and cashews) imported
varieties like cabernet sauvignon, chardonnay, chenin blanc, and pinot noirs and began
making wine. About the same time, based on research by Champagne Technologies of
France, Chateau Indage was founded in Narayangaon, in Maharashtra state. Today, the
large winery makes high-end cabernet sauvignon and chardonnay under the brand
Chantilli. There are numerous other small, high-end Indian wineries, including Sula
Vineyards, begun by Rajeev Samant, a Mumbai-born, Stanford University-educated
former executive with Oracle corporation (the winery is known for sauvignon blanc and
chenin blanc); as well as Chateau d’Ori (known for its merlot) and Grover Vineyards
(known for its cabernet sauvignon-shiraz blend). All told, in 2011, India had an estimated
10,000 acres (4,000 hectares) of grapevines (about a quarter of the number of vineyard
acres in the tiny Napa Valley), according to the organization Indianwine; the exact number
of wineries is not tracked and remains unknown.
    Establishing a modern wine industry in India has been fraught with challenges—the
first of which is climate. The southern half of India lies squarely in the tropics, thus the
summer growing season is extremely hot, humid, and prone to monsoons. As a result,
vineyards must be planted in cooler, higher-altitude areas, or viticultural techniques to
mitigate the effects of heat and humidity have to be employed. Among the coolest wine-
producing regions are the states of Kashmir and Punjab, in the north, near the Himalayas.
But wine is also made in the southern states of Maharashtra (the area around Nasik is
considered the heart of Indian wine country), Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Goa, and in the
farthest southern state of Tamil Nadu. In these areas, vines are often trained on tall
pergolas, creating a large canopy to protect the grapes from sunburn and simultaneously
lifting the vines up to provide maximum air circulation.
    Finally, grapes intended for wine represent just a small fraction of all the grapes grown
in India, many of which, like anabeshahi, arkavati, and arkashyam, are indigenous table
grapes. And although they can be used for wine, the three most widely planted grapes of
all—sultana (known in California as Thompson seedless), Bangalore blue (the American
hybrid Isabella), and gulabi (black muscat)—are far more often eaten out of hand.
                                                                               WINE LAWS

Maybe you’d like to pour yourself a glass of wine and get comfortable before reading further. What follows are
overviews of the (sometimes complex) wine laws of each wine-producing country included in this book. We’ll
start with France, and because it is often considered a model for the rest of the world, we’ll go into it in some
depth. In addition, be sure to see the box on European Union Wine Laws (page 142) for how EU law
intersects with specific national regulations.
                                                  FRANCE
In 1935, the Institut National de l’Origine et de la Qualité (previously the Institut National des Appellations
d’Origine—INAO) was created with the mission of setting up the French Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée
(AOC) system. Today, the AOC is still administered and periodically revised by the INAO. The AOC is
equivalent to the European Union designation PDO, Protected Designation of Origin.
  The system sets standards for specific categories of wine as well as various foods, including Grenoble
walnuts, Bresse chickens, Isigny butter, Puy lentils, Nyons olive oil, and Brie, Cantal, Roquefort, and
Reblochon cheeses.
  Under the AOC system, the two main categories of wine, in descending order of quality, are:


VINS D’APPELLATION D’ORIGINE CONTRÔLÉE
The category Vins d’Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée—AOC—includes the finest wines of France. Each wine
must abide by a strict set of regulations. Among other issues, the regulations cover:
AREA OF PRODUCTION: Each area is precisely defined. Only wines made from vines growing within the
borders of the appellation have the right to use that appellation.
VARIETY OF GRAPE: Each area has permissible grape varieties, which may be used only in given
proportions. If a producer makes wine from grapes other than those permitted, or uses a ratio of grapes that
is not permitted, he or she must forfeit the appellation.
YIELD PER HECTARE: The basic yield allowed is set, although in some years it may be increased. In
Bordeaux, for example, the yield permitted for red wine is 55 hectoliters per hectare, or 1,452 gallons of wine
for every 2.47 acres. The legal yield for white wine is slightly higher.
VINEYARD PRACTICES: How and when the vines can be pruned, the type of trellising system, and whether
the use of irrigation is permitted are regulated. For some AOCs, even the start date of the harvest is specified.
DEGREE OF ALCOHOL: All AOC wines have a required minimum level of alcohol content, and some have a
maximum level.
WINEMAKING PRACTICES: Winemaking practices, such as chaptalization and acidification, are regulated,
as are, in some cases, aging requirements.
TASTING AND ANALYSIS: All AOC wines must go through a chemical analysis and pass a taste test for
typicity—that is, they must taste true to their kind. Those wines that fail must be declassified.
VARIETAL LABELING: All French wines may now put the grape variety on the label, but only if 85 percent of
the wine constitutes the variety mentioned. Some AOCs are even more strict, specifying that a grape variety
can be listed only if the wine is 100 percent of that variety.
While it may seem that such detailed rules are unfairly strict (especially compared to the New World, where
winemakers have vastly more creative rein), a majority of French wine producers support such regulations (as
do their counterparts in other European countries). Why?
   The answer can be summarized this way. By holding all variables constant, French and other European
producers are able to determine which vineyard plots consistently produce the greatest wines. In other words,
since all producers make essentially the same kind of wine in essentially the same way from the same grapes
grown in essentially the same manner, the only thing left that might account for quality differences is the exact
plot of land where the grapes were grown. The French/European approach highlights the terroir of the place
where the grapes were grown.


VINS DE PAYS
France’s so-called country wines—vins de pays—are defined by region. Like AOC wines, they must meet
certain rules, although these rules are usually far less strict than for AOC wines. Permissible yields are higher,
and the rules concerning grape varieties are more flexible. Vins de Pays must carry the logo/stamp for the
European Union designation PGI—Protected Geographical Indication or, in French, Indication Géographique
Protégée (IGP). They may choose to be known by the EU designation rather than the French Vin de Pays.
                                                   ITALY
Italian wine regulations are roughly similar to the French Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée laws. The Italian
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry oversees the regulations. There are four categories. In ascending order
they are: VDT, IGT, DOC, and DOCG. You’ll find an overview of these laws below. However, as Italy is a
member of the European Community (EU), some Italian wineries use EU wine designations as well as (or in
place of) Italy’s national wine laws. To understand how EU regulations intersect with Italian and other national
regulations, see PDO, PGI—The European Union Wine Laws on page 142 in the French chapter.
   VDT (Vino da Tavola): These are simple, generic table wines that may list only the type of wine inside—
red, white, or rosé. Sometimes, a varietal name is also listed, for example, Merlot, Italy.
   IGT (Indicazione Geografica Tipica): Roughly equal to the French designation Vin de Pays, IGT wines are
“country wines” that must meet certain rules regarding the area of production, the permissible grape varieties,
the maximum yield of grapes per hectare, and so forth, but these rules are generally much less stringent than
for DOC or DOCG wines. There were 118 IGTs as of 2013.
   DOC and DOCG (Denominazione di Origine Controllata and Denominazione di Origine Controllata e
Garantita): There are more than 330 areas where wine is produced that have been given DOC status, and 73
have DOCG status. In these regions, the DOC and DOCG laws govern the area of production, the
permissible grape varieties, the maximum yield of grapes per hectare, the minimum degree of alcohol the
wines must possess, such vineyard practices as pruning and trellising systems, winemaking practices, and
the requirements for aging. In addition, all wines must pass chemical analysis and taste tests for typicity. The
rules for DOCG wines are somewhat stricter than those for DOC wines. And, interestingly, most DOCGs are
found in the northern part of the country, with Tuscany, Piedmont, and the Veneto accounting for the lion’s
share of them. A full list of Italy’s DOCGs can be found on page 967.
                                                  SPAIN
The Spanish Denominación de Origen (DO) laws, first enacted in 1932 and revised since, are similar to
France’s Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée laws, which define and protect wines from specific geographic
areas. You’ll find an overview of these laws below. However, as Spain is a member of the European Union
(EU), some Spanish wineries use EU wine designations as well as (or in place of) Spain’s national wine laws.
To understand how EU regulations intersect with Spanish and other national regulations, see PDO, PGI—The
European Union Wine Laws, on page 142 in the chapter on France.
   Spanish regulations currently cover sixty-nine DOs, or officially recognized and geographically defined
wine regions. An even higher designation—the Denominación de Origen Calificada (DOCa, or Qualified
Denomination of Origin)—was created in 1991. To qualify for DOCa status, a region’s wines must have
demonstrated exceptional quality over a long period of time, and the region must have had DO status for at
least ten years. Currently, only two regions in Spain have DOCa status: Rioja and Priorat.
    Each DO and DOCa has its own Consejo Regulador, a governing control board that enforces specific
viticultural and winemaking standards and regulates the total acreage that may be planted, the types of
grapes planted, the maximum yield, the minimum length of time wines must be aged, plus the information that
may be given on the label. In addition, each Consejo Regulador maintains a laboratory and tasting panel.
Every wine awarded DO or DOCa status must be tasted, evaluated, and found to be true to type.
    Since 2003, Spanish law also allows for a status that many consider higher than DOCa—Pago. The word
pago means “single estate.” Thus, estates of exceptional merit (the Spanish equivalents of grand crus) may
each have their own Pago DO if they meet certain guidelines. The bodega must make wines only from grapes
grown on the estate, and the wine must be made and bottled on the estate. Interestingly, to be awarded Pago
status, the estate must also have an international reputation for quality, as measured by receiving high scores
from the world’s top wine critics and placements on the wine lists of the world’s most famous restaurants. The
first estate in Spain to receive its own Pago DO was the Dominio de Valdepusa estate, in Castilla-La Mancha.
The estate, owned by well-known Spanish vintner Carlos Falcó, makes wines under the name Marqués de
Griñón (Falcó’s title). Today, some ten estates have Pago DO status, most of them in the regions of Castilla-
La Mancha and Navarra.
  If a grape variety is listed on a Spanish label, the wine must be composed of at least 85 percent of the
variety named.
   The term Vino de Pago may be used for an estate wine of recognized prestige that comes from a certain
place or site within a recognized DO. Such wine must be made and bottled at the winery of the specific
vineyard named.
    As for aging, the terms below, when used, carry the following national requirements. A DO or DOCa region
—Ribera del Duero or Rioja, for example—may choose to make their local requirements more strict than what
follows, but not more lenient.
   Vino de Crianza: May be used for red wines aged a minimum of twenty-four months, six of which must be
in oak containers of a maximum capacity of 330 liters. White and rosé wines must be aged at least eighteen
months.
  Reserva: May be used for red wines aged a minimum of thirty-six months, twelve of which must be in oak
and twenty-four of which must be in bottle. White and rosé wines must be aged eighteen months, six of which
must be in oak.
  Gran Reserva: May be used for red wines aged a minimum of sixty months, eighteen of which must be in
oak. White and rosé wines must be aged forty-eight months, six of which must be in oak.
                                              PORTUGAL
Portugal was one of the first European countries to have wine laws. As early as 1756, Portugal’s then prime
minister, the Marquis da Pombal, established the legal boundaries of the Douro River Valley to protect the
authenticity of Port wine. Portugal’s wine industry was dramatically modernized after the country joined the
European Economic Community (later renamed the European Union) in 1986. Below, you’ll find an overview
of Portuguese wine law.
   As Portugal is a member of the European Union (EU), some Portuguese wineries use EU wine
designations as well as (or in place of) Portugal’s national wine laws. To understand how EU regulations
intersect with Portuguese and other national regulations, see PDO, PGI—The European Union Wine Laws on
page 142.
   Today, the country has more than fifty DOPs (Denominação de Origem Protegida, or Designations of
Protected Origin) within its eleven major wine regions. These designations, similar to France’s AOC
(Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée, or Appellations of Controlled Origin) are set forth by Portugal’s Instituto da
Vinha e do Vinho (Institute of Vines and Wines), as well as by numerous local commissions. The regulations
not only determine the physical boundaries of a wine district, but also set forth strict requirements for the
wines made there, including the total acreage that may be planted, the types of grapes and their maximum
yield, the methods of vinification, the minimum length of time wines must be aged, and the information given
on the label. As for labeling, most Portuguese table wines are named according to the geographic area from
which they come: Douro, Dão, Alentejo, and so forth. However, some wines are also labeled according to
grape variety. If the grape variety is given, at least 85 percent of the grapes for that wine must be of that
variety.
                                             GERMANY
The vineyards and wines of Germany are governed by a monumental set of laws that took effect in 1971 and
were aimed at simplifying German wine. The 1971 law established the eleven original German anbaugebiete
or wine regions (which, in 1989, with the reunification of Germany, became thirteen) and their subdivisions—
the thirty-nine districts known as bereiche and 167 collections of vineyards known as grosslagen. The 1971
law also effectively collapsed the then-existing 30,000 individual named vineyard sites down to some 2,600
individual vineyard sites, or einzellagen.
   The most basic category of German wine is called, by law, Deutscher wein (formerly this was called
tafelwein). Deutscher wein must be made from German grapes in Germany.
   For Deutscher wein as well as the higher quality category, Qualitätswein bestimmter Anbaugebiete (QbA)
and higher still, Prädikatswein, Germany’s detailed wine laws regulate where the grapes can be grown, the
maximum yield of wine per hectare, the minimum alcohol level the wine must attain, whether chaptalization is
permissable, what methods of fermentation may be used, and what information must appear on the label. The
laws also specify how ripe the grapes must be (measured in Oechsle) in order to be considered a QbA, or a
Prädikatswein and its subdivisions of kabinett, spätlese, auslese, and other even greater ripeness levels.
Finally, the law requires that each wine be examined, tasted, and found to be true to type. For more
comments on the requirements for QbA and Prädikat wines, see the German and Austrian glossary, page
963.
                                                AUSTRIA
Austria’s wine laws are among the strictest in Europe. They stipulate precise requirements for every wine,
including the minimum sugar content of the grapes at harvest and the maximum alcohol level.
   Basic, neutral wine, referred to as Landwein, is not ripe. One step up, so-called quality wine
(Qualitätswein) is a bit riper. But fine wine falls into a higher category still, called Prädikatswein. These are
high-quality wines that must achieve higher levels of ripeness and may not be chaptalized or sweetened after
fermentation. Thus, in a dry table wine, any tiny amount of residual sugar in the wine may only result naturally
(that is, the fermentation stopped on its own before every trace of residual sugar was gone). For sweet wines,
fermentation can be stopped, leaving natural residual sugar in the wine, but again, the sweetness cannot be
added after the fact (i.e., after fermentation). For Prädikatswein, there are also detailed laws regulating where
the grapes can be grown, the maximum yield of wine per hectare, what methods of fermentation may be
used, and what information must appear on the label. If a wine lists a specific grape, for example, it must
contain at least 85 percent of that grape. If a wine has a vintage on the label, it must contain a minimum of 85
percent of that vintage. If a wine region is listed, all of the wine (100 percent) must come from that region.
   The laws also require that each wine be examined, tasted, and found true to type. Finally, each wine must
be scientifically tested and given an official test number. Indeed, all Austrian wines have a red-and-white
striped “banderole” around the neck or on top of the cork or screwcap, which must be purchased by the
producer to ensure that official regulations are not breached.
                                              HUNGARY
Hungarian wines are governed by a set of national laws last revised in 1997. Roughly similar to the
Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC) laws of France, Hungary’s regulations define the boundries of wine
regions, stipulate the grape varieties that can be planted, designate allowable winemaking and viticultural
processes, and govern how wines are labeled.
                                               GREECE
When Greece joined the European Union in the 1980s, it revised its regulations along the lines of the
Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC) laws of France. The laws defined the boundaries of wine regions,
stipulated which grape varieties could be planted, designated allowable winemaking and viticultural
processes, specified aging regimes, and governed how wines were labeled. However, after the European
Union established its own set of wine laws in 2009, Greece adopted these in place of its national laws. (All
twenty-seven EU member countries are free to do this, or any member country may institute a hybrid system
that recognizes both EU wine law and the country’s own national laws.) Following are the designations you
will find on Greek wines:


PROTECTED DESIGNATION OF ORIGIN (PDO) WINES
The European Union designation PDO is the highest designation and is equivalent to what, in France, would
be a wine designated as AOC, or Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée. In essence, a PDO indicates a historic top
wine-producing area. In Greece, twenty-nine wines carry PDO status. They fall into two categories:
• AOQS (Designation of Origin of Superior Quality) for dry wines. These must carry a red band on the neck of
  the bottle.
• AOC (Controlled Appellation of Origin) for sweet wines. These carry a blue band on the neck of the bottle.


PROTECTED GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATION (PGI) WINES:
The European Union designation PGI falls below PDO. Historically, these were the table wines of a country.
(In France, for example, PGI is equivalent to Vin de Pays.) In Greece, the PGI designation covers all local
wines (before the EU law was adopted, these were called topikos oenos) and traditional wines such as
retsina.
                                         UNITED STATES
Although winemakers in the United States have considerable creative freedom to make whatever sort of wine
they want, there are several important federal rules and regulations wine producers must abide by. These are
administered by the TTB (Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau), under whose jurisdiction wine falls.
Here is a quick summary of the most important laws.
• When a wine is labeled with an American Viticultural Area (AVA), at least 85 percent of the grapes that
  make up the wine must come from that AVA.
• In place of an AVA, a wine can be labeled by county—Sonoma County, Mendocino County, and so on.
  When a wine is labeled by county, at least 75 percent of the grapes must come from that county.
• In place of an AVA, a wine may be labeled by state. Wines labeled by state must contain at least 75 percent
  wine from that state. Some states, however, require higher percentages. In California, 100 percent of the
  wine must be from California. In Washington State, 95 percent of the wine must be from Washington State.
• When a grape variety is named on the label, the wine must be composed of at least 75 percent of that
  variety. Again, some states have stricter rules. In Oregon, this percentage has been raised to 90 percent for
  the most-planted grapes, such as pinot noir and chardonnay. (But for wines made from many varieties
  grown in small amounts in Oregon—cabernet sauvignon, cabernet franc, merlot, malbec, sauvignon blanc,
  and others—the percentage remains at 75 percent.)
• When a vintage is declared on the label, 95 percent of the wine must be from that vintage.
• All bottles of wine made in the United States are required to carry a warning about the dangers of alcohol
  and to indicate that the wine contains sulfites (see page 41).
                                                 CANADA
The Vintners Quality Alliance (VQA) is the agency responsible for the creation and administration of the rules
and regulations that govern quality wine in Canada’s two main wine regions, British Columbia and Ontario.
There are slight variations to the rules between the two regions, but the major points are the same. Like the
regulations set forth in most of the New World, the VQA laws are far less stringent than the laws governing
most European regions. Some of the most important regulations in Canada are as follows:
• If a grape variety is named on the label, at least 85 percent of the wine must be composed of the grape
  named.
• If two varietals are listed, they must comprise at least 90 percent of the blend.
• If a vintage is indicated on the label, 85 percent of the wine must be composed of grapes from that vintage.
• If a vineyard is named on the label, 100 percent of the grapes must be from that vineyard.
• In order for a wine to be labeled ‘British Columbia’ or ‘Ontario’ 100 percent of the grapes must be from the
  corresponding region.
• The regulations for icewine are Canada’s strictest. Among them: only certain grape varieties are allowed,
  the grapes must be naturally frozen on the vine, and the external temperature must reach –8°C (17.6°F)
  before the grapes can be picked.
                                             AUSTRALIA
Australia, like the United States, does not have a strict system of laws regulating grape growing and
winemaking. There are no rules similar to the French Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée laws, which govern the
varieties of grapes that can be planted in specific areas, the yield produced from those grapes, how the
grapes are vinified, how long the wines are aged, and so on.
   However, there are regulations that govern labeling and define viticultural areas. These areas, known as
Geographic Indications (GIs), are similar to American Viticultural Areas (AVAs) in the United States. All of
Australia’s wine regulations are set forth by the governmental agency Wine Australia, and notably stipulate
the following:
• If a grape variety is named on the label, 85 percent of the wine must be composed of the grape named.
• If two or more varieties are listed, they together must comprise at least 85 percent of wine, must be the
  major contributing varieties of the blend (each must contribute at least 5 percent of the blend), and must be
  listed on the label in order of percentage. Thus, a wine labeled Cabernet-Shiraz has more cabernet than
  shiraz; a wine labeled Shiraz-Cabernet has just the opposite.
• If a vintage is indicated on the label, 85 percent of the wine must be composed of grapes from the vintage
  indicated.
• If a Geographical Indication (GI), state, zone, region, subregion, or vineyard is named on the label, 85
  percent of the wine must come from that place.
                                          NEW ZEALAND
There is no strict system of laws regulating grape-growing and winemaking for New Zealand—nothing
comparable to the French Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée laws, governing such matters as the varieties of
grapes that can be planted in specific areas, the yield produced from those vines, how the grapes are vinified,
or how long the wines are aged. New Zealand does have regulations that govern labeling and certain aspects
of wine production. These rules are part of the country’s official Food Act and Food Regulations, and they
mandate that:
• If a grape variety or varieties are named on a label, 85 percent of the wine must be composed of the variety
  or varieties named. In practice, many New Zealand wines are 100 percent the variety or varieties named.
• If two grapes are named on the label, they must be listed in order of percentage. When you see a wine
  labeled Cabernet-Merlot, it contains more cabernet than merlot; a wine labeled Merlot-Cabernet has just the
  opposite.
• When an area, district, or region appears on a label, 85 percent of the wine must come from that place.
                                                   CHILE
Like most New World countries, Chile does not have a strict system of laws that regulate grape-growing and
winemaking—nothing comparable to the French Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée laws, which govern which
grape varieties can be planted in which areas, as well as myriad other details concerning how the vines are
grown and how the wine is made and aged. In 1994 and 1995, for the first time, however, new laws went into
effect establishing each key viticultural region as a Denominacion de Origen (DO). These were established
jointly by the Servicio Agricola Ganadero, the Ministerio de Agricultura, and the wineries themselves. The
laws define not only the key appellations but also the subregions and zones within those regions.
  The 1995 laws also mandated that:
• If a wine is labeled with a viticultural region, at least 75 percent of the wine must come from that region.
• If a grape variety is named on the label, the wine must be composed of at least 75 percent of the grape
  named.
• In wines with labels specifying a vintage, at least 75 percent of the wine must come from that vintage.
  In practice, most Chilean wineries observe an 85 percent minimum for all three categories above, to
comply with European Union standards for export.
   Finally, while there are no legal aging requirements for terms like Reserva Especial and Gran Reserva,
Chilean law does mandate that wines that use these designations must spend at least some time in oak. That
said, labeling a $14 wine as a Gran Reserva (as is often done in Chile) seems, if nothing else, a little
misdirected.
                                              ARGENTINA
Although wine exports are monitored by its Instituto Nacional de Vitivinicultura, Argentina does not have a
well-defined system of appellations, and thus, where wine regions begin and end is more a matter of common
opinion than law. Nor are there laws regulating grape growing and wine-making. There are, for example, no
rules similar to the French Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée laws, governing what grapes may be planted in
which regions, with details for their cultivation and how wine should be made from them.
  All of this said, Argentina’s rapid evolution has meant that the wine industry itself has begun to attempt to
define specific viticultural regions, especially within the main large wine-producing region, Mendoza.
   As for labeling regulations, if a grape variety is named on the label, 85 percent of the wine must consist of
that grape. You will also find label terms such as reserva and gran reserva on Argentine wine labels, but
neither of these terms is defined by law. Either term can be used by a winery to mean whatever the winery
intends.
                                           SOUTH AFRICA
In 1973, South Africa’s Wine of Origin (WO) legislation was enacted, defining the geographical boundaries of
wine regions and regulating labeling. The system, which is administered by the Wine and Spirit Board (WSB),
does not impose strict grape-growing and winemaking regulations in the manner of, say, France’s Appellation
d’Origine Contrôlée system. But it is more strict than most New World systems and requires, for example, that
all wines be analytically tested, as well as tasted by a professional panel, before the wine can be certified to
be sold. Once certified, the wine receives the official seal of the WSB (locally known as a “bus ticket”), which
is affixed to the neck of the bottle.
   The WO system establishes four nested categories of appellations. The largest category is a geographical
unit. There are five of these, the most important of which is the Western Cape. Within each geographical unit
is a region, followed by a district, followed by the smallest geographical entity, a ward. So, for example, within
the Western Cape is the Coastal region and within that, the district Stellenbosch and within that, the ward of
Papegaaiberg.
   Most wines in South Africa are labeled by grape type. A wine labeled with a variety must be composed of
at least 85 percent of that variety. And if a single area is named as the appellation, then 100 percent of the
grapes must come from that area. If the grapes come from multiple areas, that, too, must be indicated on the
label.
                                                                          GLOSSARIES

I’ve provided here a main glossary with a comprehensive set of definitions for common English wine words
and extensive glossaries for French, Italian, Spanish, and German and Austrian wine terms. You’ll also find
glossaries for the most important Portuguese, Hungarian, and Greek terms. Words appearing in all capital
letters are cross-referenced within the main glossary or the glossaries for individual countries. The French
glossary begins on page 950, the Italian on page 954, the Spanish on page 957, the Portuguese on page
959, the German and Austrian on page 960, the Hungarian on page 964, and the Greek on page 965.
MAIN GLOSSARY

A
ACETALDEHYDE: Produced naturally during FERMENTATION, acetaldehyde is a colorless volatile
component with a pungent ODOR. It is an asset in flor-based (see FLOR, Spanish Glossary) wines, such as
Sherry, but a detectable amount in table wine is considered a flaw. Also occurs in coffee and ripe fruit.
ACETIC: A negative description for a wine with an unpleasant, sharp, vinegarlike smell and taste. A wine
becomes acetic as a result of the presence of acetobacter, a bacteria that causes the natural conversion of
wine to vinegar by producing acetic acid in the presence of air. See VOLATILE ACIDITY.
ACID: A natural component of wine; responsible for the zesty, refreshing qualities of some, acidity also helps
wine to age. Wines with the proper amount of acid relative to their ALCOHOL content are vibrant and lively to
drink. Wines with little acid relative to the alcohol are the opposite: FLAT and blowsy. Wines with excess acid
taste sharp and biting. There are multiple acids in wine, the three most important of which—tartaric, malic,
and citric—all come from the grapes. Other acids may be produced during FERMENTATION.
ACIDIFICATION: A process practiced in warm wine regions whereby a winemaker adds ACID to grape MUST
before or during FERMENTATION in order to boost its naturally low level of acidity, in hopes of creating a
more balanced wine. Acidification is legal and widely practiced in many parts of the world, including
California. Also called acidulation.
ACIDITY: See ACID.
AERATION: The process of intentionally exposing wine to oxygen to “open up” and soften it. Aeration occurs
during the winemaking process, as when wine is poured or racked (see RACKING) from barrel to barrel, but it
may also take place at serving time, such as when a young wine is poured into a carafe or a decanter or even
just swirled in the glass.
AFTERTASTE: See FINISH.
AGING: The process of intentionally holding a wine for a period of time so that the components in it can
integrate and the wine can grow softer and possibly more COMPLEX. Wines are generally aged first in a
barrel and later in bottles, since wines evolve differently in each vessel. The length of time any wine is aged is
initially up to the producer, though many of the top European wines by law must be aged a certain minimum
number of months or years. Most wines worldwide are aged only briefly before release.
AH-SO: A wine opener often used by sommeliers to remove corks that have begun to crumble, as with very
old wines. The device does not penetrate the cork, but instead two flat metal blades are inserted down the
sides of the cork and then the device is gently twisted while pulling upward, to remove the cork. It was
originally named the Magic Cork Extractor and patented in 1879, but it has been called the Ah-So since the
1960s.
ALCOHOL: During FERMENTATION, yeasts convert the natural sugar in grapes to alcohol (also known as
ETHANOL or ETHYL ALCOHOL) and CARBON DIOXIDE. The riper the grapes, the more sugar they contain
and the higher the potential alcohol content of the wine will be (see How Wine Is Made, page 37). Wines with
low alcohol (German rieslings, for example) are LIGHT-BODIED wines. With high alcohol (many California
chardonnays) are FULL-BODIED and almost CHEWY. When a high alcohol wine has too little FRUIT and a
low ACID content, it tastes out of BALANCE and gives off a HOT or slightly burning sensation in your mouth.
ALCOHOL BY VOLUME: The percentage of the ALCOHOL content by volume in a wine must, by United
States law, appear on every wine label. However, because alcohol can be difficult to measure precisely and
because wineries often need to print their labels before they know the exact alcohol content, the percentage
stated on the label need only be accurate within 1.5 percent as long as the total amount is not more than 14
percent. If greater than 14 percent, it must be accurate to within 1 percent. For example, a wine labeled 12
percent alcohol by volume may contain anywhere from 10.5 to 13.5 percent alcohol.
ALDEHYDES: Produced as FERMENTATION converts sugar to ALCOHOL, aldehydes have pungent odors
that contribute to the flavor and quality of wine but in excess are undesirable.
AMPELOGRAPHY: The science of the identification and classification of grapevines according to their
physical properties, such as the size and shape of their leaves and grape clusters. Increasingly, grapevines
are also being identified by DNA typing.
AMPHORAE: Earthenware vessels, ranging in size from that of a milk can to a refrigerator, used by the
ancient Greeks and Romans to store and ship wine. An amphora was oval in shape, with two large handles at
the top for carrying and a pointed bottom so that the vessel could be pushed into the soft earth, where it
would remain upright.
ANTHOCYANINS: The red pigments in grape skins and wine.
APPEARANCE: One of the categories by which a wine can be judged by sensory evaluation, generally
including an assessment of clarity and COLOR.
APPELLATION: In general conversation the word appellation is often used simply to indicate the place where
the grapes for a given wine were grown and subsequently made into wine. Technically, however, the word has
much broader significance and importance. For this we must turn to the French for whom the full term is
Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée, often abbreviated as AOC (see page 137). France’s AOC regulations have
become the world’s model for laws that define and protect geographically named wines, spirits, and even
certain foods. For any given wine the AOC laws stipulate, among other things, the precise area where the
grapes that make the wine can be grown, the grape varieties that the wine can be made from, the permissible
YIELD, aspects of VITICULTURE, such as PRUNING and irrigation, the minimum alcoholic strength of the
wine, plus various details of how the wine can be made. For a given French wine to carry an appellation, it
must meet all of the criteria set down in the AOC laws. Multiple appellations can exist within a larger
appellation. For example, Margaux is an AOC within the AOC Haut-Médoc, which itself is an AOC within the
larger AOC Bordeaux. The AOC laws evolved progressively, beginning in the 1930s. Today, most European
wine-producing countries have similar, fairly stringent systems that define and govern the wines produced. In
the NEW WORLD, including the United States, regulations defining the geographic boundaries of wine-
producing areas are more recent. While New World regulations may specify the boundaries of a given place
such as the Napa Valley, they rarely specify or regulate details, such as grape varieties, permissible yields, or
how the wine can be made. See also AVA.
AROMA: A term broadly used to describe a wine’s smell. Technically, however, the smell of any wine is
divided into the aroma, the smell that derives from the grapes, and the BOUQUET, a more complex smell that
a wine acquires after AGING.
AROMATIC: A positive description, indicating that a wine has a pronounced AROMA. Some VARIETAL wines,
such as muscat and gewürztraminer, are well known for being especially aromatic, often having SPICY and/or
floral (see FLOWERY) scents.
ASTRINGENT: A term describing the drying MOUTHFEEL of a wine with a considerable amount of TANNIN:
a dry sensation provoked by some wines and certain foods, such as walnuts. Often used negatively to
describe red wines with a lot of green or unripe tannin. Excess astringency is unpleasant and causes the
mouth to pucker.
AUTOLYSIS: The decomposition of spent yeast cells by enzymes they contain. When a wine is SUR LIE, or
on the LEES, it is left in contact with the spent yeasts that performed the FERMENTATION. As the yeast cells
break down, they impart, for reasons not fully understood, an extra dimension of flavor, texture, VISCOSITY,
and complexity to the wine.
AVA: The acronym for American Viticultural Area. An AVA is defined as “a delimited grape growing region,
distinguished by geographical features, the boundaries of which have been recognized and defined.” On
United States wine labels, such place names as Napa Valley, Sonoma Valley, Columbia Valley, and so on, are
all AVAs. There are now more than 203 AVAs in the United States.


B
BAKED: Negative term used when a table wine’s AROMA and/or flavor seems overripe, caramel-like, or even
burnt. Poorly made table wines allowed to get too warm or to become oxidized often taste baked (see
OXIDATION). For certain wines, such as Sherry and Madeira, however, some “bakedness” is considered
appropriate and positive, especially when combined with the wines’ tangy nuttiness.
BALANCE: A harmonic equilibrium among the components of a wine (ACID, ALCOHOL, FRUIT, TANNIN, and
so on) such that no one characteristic stands out like a sore thumb. Great wines have balance.
BARREL-FERMENTED: Used to describe a wine—usually a white—that has undergone FERMENTATION in
small oak barrels as opposed to in more neutral large casks, cement vats, or stainless-steel tanks.
Fermentation in a small barrel can impart a richer flavor and creamier texture to some wines, though these
characteristics may be acquired at the expense of the wines’ FRUIT. To mitigate against too intense a barrel-
fermented character, winemakers can use older barrels, and/or ferment only a portion of the wine in barrels
and then BLEND this portion with wine that has not been barrel-fermented.
BENTONITE: A type of light clay, usually from the United States or Africa, mixed into wine to clarify it by
removing tiny suspended protein molecules that can cause a hazy appearance (see FINING). As the
bentonite settles, it absorbs and carries the particles suspended in the wine along with it to the bottom of the
vessel. The clear wine is then racked off the settled material.
BIG: A descriptive term used for FULL-BODIED, robust wines that are usually high in ALCOHOL.
BIODYNAMIC VITICULTURE: See box, page 34 in the chapter Where It All Begins.
BITTER: A harsh flavor in wine, often derived from stems and seeds that have been carelessly or
inadvertently crushed along with the grapes. Bitterness can also be caused by unripe grapes or unripe
TANNIN. In certain big red wines, a slight bitterness is considered a positive nuance, just as it would be in a
good espresso.
BLEND: To combine two or more lots of wine in hopes of enhancing flavor, BALANCE, and/or complexity.
Often these are wines from different grape varieties (cabernet sauvignon and merlot, for example). However,
blends may also be made up of wines that come from grapes grown in different soil or microclimates, wines
that come from vines of different ages, wines from different CLONES, or wines made by different winemaking
methods (some aged in one kind of oak, some in another, for instance). Virtually all Bordeaux wines and
Champagnes are blends, as are wines from France’s southern Rhône Valley and numerous other wines from
elsewhere around the world.
BODY: The perceived weight of a wine in your mouth. The perception is dependent on ALCOHOL—the
higher the alcohol content, the more FULL-BODIED the wine. As a point of reference, consider the relative
weights of skim milk, whole milk, and half-and-half. Light-bodied wines feel like skim milk, medium-bodied
ones like whole milk, and full-bodied ones like half-and-half.
BOOZE: Once spelled “bouse,” the term comes from a medieval Dutch word, büsen, meaning “to drink to
excess.”
BOTRYTIS CINEREA: A beneficial fungus, also known as noble rot, which is necessary to produce many of
the world’s great sweet wines, including Sauternes. In certain years, when the degree of humidity is just right,
Botrytis cinerea will attack grapes, covering them with a gray mold. The mold lives by penetrating the grapes’
skins and using up the available water in the juice. This concentrates the sugar, flavor, and ACID so that a
COMPLEX wine of exceptional sweetness can be made. Botrytis is unique in that, unlike other molds, it
produces flavors that harmonize with the flavors of particular grapes.
BOTRYTIZED: Affected by BOTRYTIS CINEREA.
BOTTLE: Initially, the amount glass bottles held was not consistent. From the fifteenth to the seventeenth
century, bottles held anywhere from 16 to 52 ounces. Today a standard wine bottle holds 25.36 ounces (750
milliliters). Restaurants generally pour five to six glasses of wine from a single bottle.
BOTTLE AGING: The process of allowing a wine to rest for a considerable period of time (usually years) in a
bottle. Wines that have been bottle aged taste more mature, and their flavors can become so integrated that
it’s no longer easy to identify such specific fruit flavors as lemon, raspberry, or cherry. Bottle aging adds to the
complexity of a wine (see AGING).
BOTTLE SICKNESS: A temporary condition that occurs following the bottling process, during which wine is
exposed to large amounts of oxygen as it is transferred from barrels or tanks to bottles. A wine with bottle
sickness, sometimes called bottle shock, can temporarily taste FLAT, dull, or out of BALANCE. The condition
usually goes away in a few weeks, occasionally after months.
BOUQUET: Technically, bouquet refers specifically to the aspects of a wine’s scent derived from BOTTLE
AGING (see AROMA).
BRIARY: A term used to describe a briar patch or barklike taste in a wine. Often briary wines have a slightly
scratchy texture, rather than being soft and round.
BRILLIANT: When applied to a wine’s color, it means the wine is absolutely clear.
BRIX: A measure of the sugar content of grapes before they are harvested. Used to estimate the ALCOHOL
content of the resulting wine.
BRUT: French term indicating a Champagne or sparkling wine that is dry to very dry, with less than 1.5
percent residual sugar.
BUD: The small node on a grapevine shoot that carries within it the grape clusters for the year to come. In the
early spring, these buds open, allowing the frail green SHOOTS and tiny clusters to emerge.
BUDDING: The act of grafting buds of one vine onto an existing planted vine. When buds from the scion
variety are grafted onto the rootstock, the process is known as “field budding.”
BULK PROCESS: An inexpensive and quick way of making SPARKLING WINE. The bulk process, also
called the Charmat method, involves placing wine in large, pressurized tanks for its SECONDARY
FERMENTATION. In an alternative and far more expensive method, known as the MÉTHODE
CHAMPENOISE (see French glossary), the secondary fermentation takes place inside individual bottles.
BULK WINE: Literally, wine not in a bottle. Wineries of all types, sizes, and levels of quality buy and sell wines
in bulk. Some sell all of their production that way. Most large producers buy significant amounts of bulk wines
from other wineries and then BLEND, bottle, and distribute those wines under their own labels. Small
prestigious wineries, however, may also sell small amounts of high-quality wine in bulk to producers who will
use it to enhance their own wines. In harvest years when the size of the crop is small, the prices for bulk wine
go up.
BUNG: A plug for stoppering a wine barrel.
BUSHVINE: A vine that is free-standing with no trellis system that looks like a bush. It is also known as a
goblet-trained vine, and many of the world’s oldest vines are trained in this manner.
BUTTERY: Used to describe a wine that has an AROMA and flavor reminiscent of butter. Buttery aromas and
flavors in wine are the result of DIACETYL, which is a by-product of MALOLACTIC FERMENTATION.


C
CANE: A SHOOT (stem) that has turned from green to tannish brown and has become hard and fibrous.
Shoots turn to canes in the fall in order to withstand the oncoming winter. The canes will ultimately be pruned
back, usually in the late winter. See PRUNING.
CANE TRAINING: The process of training a vine along a structure such as a trellis.
CANOPY: The “umbrella” formed by the leaves and SHOOTS of the grapevine.
CAP: The crusty layer—up to two feet or more deep, of grape skins, pulp, stems, and seeds—that rises and
floats on top of the juice during a red wine’s FERMENTATION. The cap must be kept in contact with the juice
by one of several methods. It may be frequently PUNCHED DOWN into the juice, or the juice can be
PUMPED OVER—that is, drawn up from the bottom of the tank and then showered over the cap. As a result
of being punched down or pumped over, the ALCOHOL in the fermenting juice can extract COLOR, AROMA,
flavor, and TANNIN from the cap. In addition, if the cap is not broken up and kept wet with the juice, it dries
out and becomes a haven for bacteria that will ultimately mar the wine.
CAPSULE: The molded plastic, bimetal, or aluminum sheath that fits over the cork and top part of the neck of
a wine bottle. Historically, capsules were made of lead to keep animals and bugs away from the cork. Today
lead is banned because of potential health risks.
CARBON DIOXIDE: Along with ALCOHOL, the gas carbon dioxide (CO2) is a by-product of
FERMENTATION. Sometimes the small amounts of CO2 remaining in a wine make it slightly SPRITZY. If
fermentation occurs in a closed vessel, such as a bottle, the CO2 becomes trapped in the wine and will
ultimately form bubbles.
CARBONIC MACERATION: More accurately called semicarbonic maceration, carbonic maceration is a type
of FERMENTATION in which bunches of uncrushed grapes are placed whole inside a closed tank. The
weight of the bunches on top crushes those on the bottom, releasing juice that ferments in the standard
manner. For the intact bunches on top, however, fermentation takes place inside each grape, leading to an
extremely juicy style of wine. Carbonic maceration is used extensively in Beaujolais, where it heightens the
wine’s already grapy flavor.
CARTOUCHE: The raised glass logo or emblem embossed on a bottle of wine, most often found on the
wines from the region of Châteauneuf-du-Pape. A cartouche is added to a wine bottle by pressing a mold
filled with molten glass to the already-finished bottle. The word cartouche comes from the oval symbol used in
ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics to indicate that the name written within the oval was a royal name.
CHAPTALIZATION: The addition of cane or beet sugar to wine MUST before or during FERMENTATION in
order to increase the total amount of sugar and hence raise the potential ALCOHOL content (see page 932).
Chaptalization is legal and widely practiced in many cooler northern European wine regions, where cool
vintage years can lead to grapes that aren’t fully ripe and, in turn, to wines that are thin and lacking in BODY.
By increasing the alcohol content of such wines, the winemaker can make them fuller bodied and therefore
make them seem more substantial. Chaptalization is not permitted in many warm wine regions, including
California, where it is not needed but could be used to produce cheap wines high in alcohol but with virtually
no flavor.
CHARMAT METHOD: See BULK PROCESS.
CHEWY: A term for mouthfilling, FULL-BODIED wines, chunky and viscous enough to seem almost
chewable. Certain grape varieties, such as zinfandel, produced in very warm areas like Amador County,
California, often take on a chewy character.
CLONE: The verb to clone means to propagate a group of vines from a “mother” vine that has desirable
characteristics. The noun clone refers to plants of the same species that have identical physical
characteristics and hence probably can be traced to a common “mother” plant. Clones are the result of
natural genetic mutations, with each mutation then being replicated via cuttings. For example, pinot noir, a
variety of grape, has many clones thanks to natural genetic mutations that have occurred over hundreds,
possibly thousands, of years. Clones are critical in VITICULTURE because two clones of the same grape
variety can taste remarkably different. Because clones occur spontaneously in nature, there is no way of
knowing how many clones of a given variety exist at any one time.
CLOSED IN: Refers to a wine that seems to have considerable potential, yet its AROMAS and flavors are
temporarily muted. A wine can be closed in for a variety of reasons. Two common ones: It’s young or it’s
densely concentrated and needs time and/or oxygen to open up. In the first instance, the closed in wine may
need additional BOTTLE AGING before it opens up; in the second case, pouring the wine into a carafe or
decanter and giving it an hour or so to breathe will help.
CLOUDY: Descriptive term, not necessarily negative, for a wine that looks hazy rather than brilliantly clear. A
wine can be slightly cloudy because it has not undergone FINING or filtration (see FILTER). Some wines,
however, are cloudy as the result of faulty winemaking.
CLOYING: Describes a wine with unbearable, candy-like sweetness. Dessert wines should not be cloying.
CLUSTER: An entire bunch of grape berries.
CLUSTER THINNING: During the vine’s growth cycle, the act of removing the fruit to enhance the quality of
the fruit left on the vine.
COARSE: Descriptive term for a harsh, unsophisticated wine, lacking in FINESSE.
COLD FERMENTATION: A type of FERMENTATION that takes place in a vessel that can be cooled, usually a
stainless-steel tank. Because cool fermentations are slower and more gentle than those that occur at warm
temperatures, they help preserve the wine’s fresh FRUIT AROMAS and flavors. Many light- and medium-
bodied white wines are cold-fermented.
COLD STABILIZATION: A common winemaking technique whereby harmless TARTRATE crystals and small
protein molecules are intentionally precipitated out of the wine. This is done by quickly chilling it. Unstabilized
wines sometimes become hazy or form snowflake-like crystals, which are odorless and tasteless but look a
bit unnerving.
COLOR: One of the distinguishing characteristics of wine, color is derived primarily from grape skins. White
wines vary from pale straw to greenish yellow to yellow-gold amber; reds from garnet to crimson to brick red
to lipstick red to purple. While the color of a wine is a tip-off to its variety (zinfandel is usually purplish in color,
for example) and an indication of its age (white wines get darker as they get older; red wines get lighter), color
is not a predictor of a wine’s flavor or quality.
COMPLEX: Describes a multifaceted wine with compelling nuances and character. Importantly, in a complex
wine, the multiple AROMAS and flavors reveal themselves subsequently over time. Thus, a complex wine is
unknowable in one sip. All great wines are complex.
CONCRETE EGGS: Large egg-shaped concrete vessels (usually 5 to 6 feet tall) used to ferment white wine.
Fermenting in concrete eggs has been practiced in France for decades, and the technique is now also used
in the New World. There are distinct advantages to fermenting wine in concrete eggs instead of oak barrels or
stainless-steel tanks. As fermentation gets underway, the oval shape of the egg helps create a vortex,
causing the wine to roll in circular arcs, assuring a thorough, active fermentation. The concrete itself holds
heat well, so the warmth created by fermentation is not quickly dissipated, and the wine doesn’t experience
wide temperature swings. Lastly, concrete is porous like wood, which allows for the gentle introduction of air,
which softens the wine.
COOPERAGE: Containers a winery uses for storing wine, usually barrels or wood casks, though the term
cooperage can also apply to concrete or stainless-steel vessels.
CORDON: A permanent woody arm that is trained horizontally from the trunk of the vine. The cordon will
support the SHOOTS and grape clusters.
CORKED: A term used to describe a wine that smells like a wet dog in a basement or, sometimes, like wet
cardboard. Wines become corked when certain bacteria in the cork cells interact with minute amounts of
chemical residues that may remain in corks or wine bottles after they are cleaned. A corked wine has a
defective AROMA and flavor, although it will not harm the drinker. Corked wine cannot be predicted. Any
wine, regardless of its quality or price, can be corked.
CROSS: A grape created by fertilizing one genetic variety of grape with another genetic variety that belongs
to the same species. While a cross may be the result of breeding, most crosses occur spontaneously in
nature. Within the European species VITIS VINIFERA two highly regarded man-made crosses are scheurebe
(riesling × silvaner) and pinotage (pinot noir × cinsaut). A cross is different than a HYBRID.
CRUSH: Used as a verb, to crush means to break the grape skins so that the pulp oozes out and
FERMENTATION can more easily begin. As a noun, crush is the general term used for all of the steps (e.g.,
harvesting) that take place just prior to fermentation.
CUTTING: A segment of a dormant CANE 14 to 18 inches long that is cut off a growing vine and used to
propagate a new plant through GRAFTING or direct planting.


D
DECANT: The act of pouring a wine (generally an older wine) off any SEDIMENT or deposits that may have
precipitated out and settled in the bottle. Sometimes the term is used to describe the action of pouring a
young wine into a decanter or carafe to mix it with oxygen and open it up, but this is more correctly called
AERATION.
DECLASSIFY: With European wines, the decision to place a wine in a category that is lower in status than
seems appropriate given the quality of the wine. European wines may be declassified for a variety of reasons.
In France, for example, wines that do not meet the strict requirements of AOC laws are declassified, usually
to TABLE WINE.
DEMI-SEC: Literally, half-dry in French. Term used for a SPARKLING WINE or Champagne that is moderately
sweet.
DEPTH: Intensity and concentration. An especially intense and concentrated cabernet sauvignon, for
example, might be described as having depth.
DESSERT WINE: General term for a wine that is sweet and, as such, could accompany, or be, dessert. In the
United States, such wines often fall into the category of LATE HARVEST. There are many ways of making
dessert wines (see page 693). Two of the world’s most famous dessert wines, French Sauternes and German
trockenbeerenauslesen, are the result of grapes that are infected with the noble rot BOTRYTIS CINEREA.
DESTEMMER: A machine that separates the stems from the grapes. When combined with a crusher, it is
called a crusher-destemmer.
DIACETYL: Buttery-tasting compound created as a by-product of MALOLACTIC FERMENTATION.
Chardonnays that have gone through malolactic fermentation often have noticeable diacetyl.
DIRTY: A negative description of wines with off flavors and odors resulting from faulty winemaking. The
implication is that something is present in the wine that shouldn’t be.
DISGORGING: Referred to in French as DÉGORGEMENT (see French glossary), this is the process used in
the making of Champagne or SPARKLING WINE by which yeasty sediment is removed from the bottle after
the second bubble-forming FERMENTATION.
DIURNAL TEMPERATURE FLUCTUATION: The difference in temperature from the coolest point in the
morning to the warmest point in the afternoon. A large difference between these two temperatures is ideal for
wine-growing regions, as it allows the sugars to ripen during the heat of the day while the natural acids are
preserved thanks to the coolness of the night. In regions such as central Spain and Mendoza, Argentina, the
diurnal temperature fluctuation can be as much as 30°F to 40°F (-1°C to 4°C).
DNA PROFILING: The practice of using DNA markers to identify the parentage of a vine. Also called DNA
typing or fingerprinting.
DRY: Commonly used to describe any wine that doesn’t contain significant grape sugar. Technically, a dry
wine is one fermented until less than 0.2 percent of natural (RESIDUAL SUGAR) remains. A wine can be dry
and taste FRUITY at the same time.
DUMB: Describes a wine that temporarily has little taste. This can be a wine, usually white, that is served so
cold that it tastes as though it’s not altogether there. Or it can be a wine, usually red, in an awkward stage of
its development when it tastes neither full of FRUIT and young, nor mature. In this strange state, sometimes
called adolescence, the wine seems dull, ungenerous, almost mute. Why some wines go through dumb
phases is not fully understood.


E
EARTHY: Used to describe a wine the AROMA or flavor of which is reminiscent of the earth. It usually refers
to flavors that evoke soil or the forest—moss, dried leaves, bark, mushrooms, and the like. The term is
sometimes extrapolated to include the pleasant, sensual aromas of the human body.
ELEGANT: A descriptive term for a wine with such FINESSE and BALANCE that it tastes refined rather than
rustic.
ENOLOGY: The science and study of winemaking, differentiated from VITICULTURE, the study of grape
growing. Also spelled oenology.
ESTATE BOTTLED: Exact definitions of estate bottled differ depending on the country from which the wine
comes. In the United States, the term may be used by a winery only if 100 percent of the wine came from
grapes grown on land owned or controlled by the winery, and both the land and winery must be in an
authorized viticultural area. The winery must produce 100 percent of the wine, age it, and bottle it at the
winery. While the winery and vineyard must be within the same viticultural area, the parcels do not need to be
contiguous.
ESTERS: Aromatic compounds produced by yeasts and bacteria primarily during FERMENTATION. Esters
may be complementary or deleterious to the wine.
ETHANOL OR ETHYL ALCOHOL: Commonly referred to simply as alcohol. ALCOHOL results when yeasts
convert the natural sugar in ripe grapes during FERMENTATION.
EXTRACT: The soluble particles in wine that would remain if all the liquid was drawn off.
EXTRA DRY: A confusing designation, extra dry actually refers to Champagne or SPARKLING WINE that is
slightly sweet, containing 1.2 to 2.0 percent residual sugar.


F
FAT: A descriptive term for the texture of a FULL-BODIED wine with saturated fruit. Although being fat is
generally considered a positive wine trait, being flabby is not. A flabby wine is a fat wine that lacks acidity so
that it seems gross and unfocused.
FERMENTATION: Also known as primary fermentation, the process whereby yeasts convert the natural sugar
in the grapes into ALCOHOL and CARBON DIOXIDE. The alcohol will remain a constituent of the wine that
results, but in most cases, the carbon dioxide will be allowed to escape as a by-product.
FIELD BLEND: An old method of VITICULTURE whereby different grape varieties are planted within a single
vineyard. The grower then harvests all of the grapes at the same time and ferments them together. Thus, the
final blend of the wine is based on the percentages of the varieties in the vineyard. If about 20 percent of the
vineyard was planted with syrah, then the final wine will be composed of about 20 percent syrah. Before the
twentieth century, most blended wines were based on field blends. Today, vineyards (or at least blocks within
a vineyard) tend to be planted with a single variety. The grower can then harvest that variety when it is
optimally ripe and ferment it separately in order to evaluate it before using it in the final blend.
FIELD SELECTION: Known in French as selection massale, a field selection is made up of a group of clones
within a given vineyard. When a grower wants to create a new vineyard using field selection, he takes
cuttings not from one mother vine (which would be a single clone) but rather from a series of different
“mothers” in the vineyard, hoping to replicate the clonal diversity with that site.
FILTER: A filter is a porous membrane or other device used to remove selected particles from a liquid. In
winemaking, a filter can be used to remove yeast cells and bacteria from the wine. Winemakers may filter a
wine extensively, not at all, or to any degree in between. Some critics contend that some wines are filtered
excessively, thereby stripping them of positive flavors and textures.
FINESSE: Used to describe a wine with elegance and BALANCE. The term implies that the wine is polished
and sophisticated. Hearty, rustic country wines would not be described as having finesse, while a well-made
Champagne or top white Burgundy might be.
FINING: A process of softening the texture of a wine by adding one or more protein coagulants, such as
gelatin, egg whites, or ISINGLASS, to the wine. The coagulant attaches itself to TANNIN molecules, then
settles to the bottom of the container, carrying tannin along with it. Fining can also be done to clarify the color
of a wine, as when BENTONITE, a clay, is used to remove unwanted particles suspended in the wine that are
making the wine appear hazy.
FINISH: The impression that a wine leaves in your mouth even after you have swallowed it. A finish may be
almost nonexistent, fairly short, or extremely long. It may be smooth and lingering or rough and choppy. A
finish may also be dominated by one component in the wine, such as ALCOHOL (a HOT finish), ACID (a tart
finish), or TANNIN (an ASTRINGENT finish). A great wine, as opposed to a good wine, always has a
pronounced, very long, lingering, well-balanced finish. In some judgings, officials actually measure the length
of time that the wine can still be tasted after it has been swallowed.
FLAT: Refers to wines that taste dull and uninteresting. Often this is because the wine lacks ACIDITY.
FLOWERY: Used to describe AROMAS and flavors, usually present in white wines, that are reminiscent of
flowers.
FORTIFIED: A wine, such as Sherry or Port, that has had its ALCOHOL content increased by the addition of
distilled grape spirits (clear brandy). Most fortified wines contain 16 to 20 percent ALCOHOL BY VOLUME.
FOXY: An odd descriptive term (having nothing to do with foxes, or sex appeal, for that matter) for the wild,
candylike aroma and flavor associated with wines that come from native American grapes of the VITIS
labrusca species, such as Concord. The flavor is derived from an ESTER, methyl anthranilate.
FREE RUN: The juice that runs—freely—simply as the result of the weight of the grapes, before any
mechanical pressure is applied in a PRESS.
FRUIT: The part of a wine’s AROMA and flavor that comes from grapes. The fruit in a wine is distinguished
from the wine’s ALCOHOL or ACID.
FRUITY: A catchall term for the pronounced flavor or AROMA that comes from the wine grapes themselves.
Wines are generally most fruity when they are young. In addition, certain VARIETAL wines (gewürztraminer,
gamay, zinfandel) seem more fruity than others.
FULL-BODIED: Having pronounced weight on the palate. Full-bodied wines are to LIGHT-BODIED wines as
half-and-half is to skim milk. All other things being equal, the higher a wine’s ALCOHOL content, the more full-
bodied it will seem.
FUTURES: See EN PRIMEUR in the French glossary.


G
GENERIC: A category of inexpensive wine that has been given a general generic name that is not controlled
by law. In the United States, terms such as “chablis,” “rhine,” “sherry,” and “burgundy” are all considered
generic terms because they are not controlled by United States law. Note that in Europe these are stringently
defined terms. Thus, any inexpensive blended wine in the United States may be called “chablis” even though
the wine itself will bear no resemblance to its namesake.
GLYCERINE: Also called glycerol, glycerine is a colorless, odorless, slightly sweet, oily substance that is a
minor by-product of FERMENTATION. Though often commented upon by tasters, glycerine probably makes
no more than a negligible contribution to a dry wine’s viscosity and it is not responsible for a wine’s so-called
“legs” or “tears.” The wines with the highest glycerine levels are sweet botrytized wines. In these wines,
glycerine may contribute slightly to the wine’s sweetness and unctuous feel.
GRAFT: To splice one grape species (say, vinifera) onto another species (say, rupestris). Grafting makes it
possible to grow, say, chardonnay, (which belongs to the species vinifera), onto a native American species
ROOTSTOCK. Without the ability to graft, many of the great vineyards of the world would have long ago
succumbed to the insect PHYLLOXERA.
GRASSY: A descriptive term for the green flavors and AROMAS reminiscent of just-cut grass, meadows,
fields of hay, and the like. The VARIETAL most often described as grassy is sauvignon blanc.
GREEN: A flavor in wine generally associated with those of grass, moss, or vegetables. Also a flavor found in
wines made from underripe grapes. A certain amount of greenness can be characteristic of, and therefore
positive in, some varietals like sauvignon blanc. With most red VARIETALS, however, obvious greenness is
considered a fault.
GUNFLINT: The taste or smell suggested by wet metal. Often used to describe sauvignon blancs, particularly
OLD WORLD ones.


H
HERBAL: When used to describe a wine with flavors or AROMAS slightly reminiscent of herbs, herbal is
positive. Good sauvignon blanc, for example, is considered slightly herbal. When herbal flavors become
extreme, they are often described as herbaceous, a quality some wine drinkers like and others don’t. Herbal
is different than VEGETAL, a term used negatively to describe a wine with a dank green OFF ODOR.
HOGSHEAD: A modern hogshead, quite a bit larger than a small barrel, holds 79.25 gallons (300 liters).
Winemakers use hogsheads when they want the wine to be less stamped by oak, as may be the case with
such delicate varieties as sangiovese and pinot noir.
HOT: Refers to a wine with a level of ALCOHOL that is out of BALANCE with its ACID and FRUIT. The
impression of excessive alcohol produces a slight burning “hit” at the top of the nasal passages and on the
palate.
HYBRID: A new grape variety developed by breeding two or more genetically distinct varieties from different
species. When the hybrid is a cross of a European species (VITIS VINIFERA) grape and a grape from any
one of several American species, it is referred to as a French-American hybrid. These hybrids were
developed by French plant breeders after the massive PHYLLOXERA infestation in the late nineteenth
century, but are now banned in most French appellations. Well-known hybrids include baco noir, villard blanc,
and seyval blanc, all of which are grown in the eastern United States.


I
IRF SCALE: A scale created to indicate how dry or sweet a riesling tastes. Created by the International
Riesling Foundation (IRF) in 2007, the chart (which appears on the back label of many riesling wines globally)
shows a spectrum from dry to medium dry to medium sweet to fully sweet. It then pinpoints where that wine
falls. The IRF scale is based on sophisticated technical guidelines, including the ratio of sugar to acid in the
wine. Wines with very high acid, for example, may still taste dry even though they have some amount of
residual sugar.
ISINGLASS: A gelatinous material, obtained from the air bladders of sturgeons and other fish, that is used in
FINING to clarify and/or soften the texture of wine; happily enough, it is removed before bottling.


J
JAMMY: Having the thick, concentrated berry AROMA or flavor of jam. Also, the thick, rich, mouthfilling
texture of jam. Full-bodied, ripe red zinfandel is often described as jammy.
JUG WINES: Inexpensive wines sold in large bottles. Jug wines can be GENERIC blends or made from one
variety of grape.


L
LABRUSCA: See VITIS LABRUSCA.
LATE HARVEST: As the term suggests, a wine that comes from grapes picked after the normal harvest and
therefore contains a greater percentage of sugar. Late-harvest wines may also be infected with the noble rot,
BOTRYTIS CINEREA. DESSERT WINES are usually late harvested.
LEES: The remnants of yeast cells and bits of grape skin that settle to the bottom of the container after
FERMENTATION is complete. Leaving the fermented wine in contact with its lees (SUR LIE), rather than
removing the lees right away, often adds complexity and nuance. See AUTOLYSIS.
LEGS: Also known as tears in Spain and cathedral windows in Germany, legs are the rivulets of wine that
have inched up the inside surface of the glass above the wine, then run slowly back down. Myth has it that
the fatter the legs, the better the wine. This is not true. The width of legs is determined by the interrelationship
of a number of complex factors, including the amount of ALCOHOL, the amount of glycerol (see
GLYCERINE), and the rate of evaporation of the alcohol and the surface tension between solids and liquids.
But the most important point is this: Legs have nothing to do with quality. It is irresistible to point out that
wines—like women—should not be judged by their legs.
LIGHT-BODIED: The term that describes a wine that has very little weight on the palate. A light-bodied wine
literally feels light in your mouth, while a FULL-BODIED wine feels just the opposite. Light-bodied wines are
low in ALCOHOL.
LUXURY WINE: The top category within the widely accepted hierarchy of wine prices established by
Gomberg, Fredrickson & Associates. Luxury Wine is defined as wine that costs more than $25 per bottle.


M
MADERIZED: A term for a wine that has been subject to a long period of OXIDATION and heat. The best-
known example is Madeira, from which the term maderized comes. TABLE WINES should not be maderized.
See OXIDATION.
MAGNUM: A 1.5-liter bottle, which contains the equivalent of two normal (750 milliliter) bottles. Magnum
means “large” in Latin.
MALOLACTIC FERMENTATION: This process has nothing to do with primary FERMENTATION, since it does
not involve yeasts or the production of ALCOHOL. Rather, malolactic fermentation is a chemical conversion of
ACID instigated by beneficial bacteria. During the process, the sharp malic acid in grapes is converted to
softer lactic acid. As a result, the wine tastes less crisp and more creamy. During malolactic fermentation, the
by-product DIACETYL is created, giving the wine a buttery character. Malolactic fermentation can either occur
naturally or be prompted by the winemaker. All red wines go through malolactic fermentation, rendering them
more microbially stable. White wines may or may not. If the winemaker wants to achieve a soft MOUTHFEEL
in the white wine, then malolactic fermentation is induced. If he or she prefers to retain dramatic, snappy
acidity, then malolactic fermentation is prevented, usually by the use of SULFUR.
MASSALE SELECTION: An ancient method (literally “mass selection”) of establishing a new vineyard or
replanting an old one by selecting numerous older vines throughout an existing vineyard, propagating and
planting them. Mass selection can help to maintain the consistency of style of the wine from a particular
vineyard. The opposite of massale selection would be to replant a vineyard using specific clonal material from
a nursery.
MERCAPTANS: Offensive-smelling compounds that result from poor winemaking when hydrogen sulfide
combines with components of the wine. The AROMAS can include putrid food, skunk, and burnt rubber.
MERITAGE: A United States trademarked designation, adopted in 1988 by the Meritage Association, for
California wines that are a blend of the varieties of grapes used in Bordeaux. A red Meritage might be made
up of cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and cabernet franc. A white Meritage would be a blend of sauvignon blanc
and sémillon. Meritage wines are usually moderately expensive and are often given fanciful proprietary
names. Such wines as Opus One, Insignia, Cain Five, and Magnificat would all qualify as Meritage if their
producers chose to have them so designated. Producers may choose not to use the term Meritage even if
their wine meets the qualifications.
MICROOXYGENATION: A process winemakers use to add oxygen to wine in a controlled fashion. Adding
oxygen changes the chemistry of the wine and, depending on the timing of the introduction, can have several
different effects. Microoxygenation is most commonly used to assist fermentation, and/or accelerate
maturation.
MOUTHFEEL: The tactile impression of a wine in your mouth. Like clothing, wine can feel soft, rough, velvety,
and so on.
MUST: The juice and liquidy pulp produced by crushing or pressing grapes before FERMENTATION.
MUSTY: A dank, old-attic smell in a wine, attributed to unclean storage containers and sometimes to grapes
processed when moldy.


N
NÉGOCIANT: See the French glossary.
NEW WORLD: A descriptive term encompassing all of those wine-producing countries that do not belong to
the OLD WORLD. The most important New World wine producers are the United States, Australia, New
Zealand, South Africa, Argentina, and Chile. By extension, New World techniques generally refer to modern
viticultural and winemaking methods that rely heavily on science. Avant-garde Old World wine producers are
often said to use New World techniques.
NOBLE ROT: See BOTRYTIS CINEREA.
NONVINTAGE: When applied to Champagne, a blend of wines from different vintage years. (A more correct
term would be multivintage.) The majority of Champagnes are nonvintage. Sherry, Port, and Madeira are also
usually nonvintage.
NOSE: The smell of a wine, including both the AROMA from the grape and the BOUQUET from AGING.


O
OAKY: A descriptive term for the toasty, woody, and vanilla smells and flavors contributed to wine during its
FERMENTATION and/or AGING in oak barrels. The newer the oak barrel, the greater the potential for the
wine to have a pronounced oaky character. Often (but not always) the longer the wine is left in oak, the
greater the oaky influence. A wine that has an oak flavor that dominates all natural fruit flavors is considered
over-oaked.
ODORS: The panoply of smells that may emanate from a wine. These include a whole range of fruits and
berries (apple, lemon, peach, apricot, cherry, raspberry, cranberry, plum, and so on); plus flowers
(honeysuckle, rose, violet, geranium, and so forth); plus assorted other smells reminiscent of the earth, yeast,
beer, leaves, herbs, vegetables, mushrooms, truffles, straw, wet wool, caramel, pepper, spices, nuts, oak,
wood, meat, game, mold, cigar boxes, dust, mint, pine, eucalyptus, olives, fuel oil, and rubber boots.
OENOLOGY: See ENOLOGY.
OFF-DRY: Ever so slightly sweet. In the U.S., there is however, no legally defined amount of sugar a wine
must have to be considered off-dry.
OFF ODORS: Unpleasant smells (chemicals, dankness, moldiness, rotten eggs, burnt rubber, sauerkraut,
and so on) that suggest that the wine was stored in unclean containers or poorly made.
OIDIUM: A vine disease also known as powdery mildew.
OLD WORLD: As applied to wine, Old World refers to those countries where wine first flourished, namely
Western or Central European countries and others ringing the Mediterranean basin and in the Near East. Old
World techniques, by extension, refer to ways of growing grapes and making wines that rely more on tradition
and less on science. The Old World is usually talked about in contrast to the NEW WORLD. Wine producers
in the New World, however, are often fond of saying that they employ Old World techniques as a way of
establishing that their wines are made at least in part by traditional methods.
OLFACTION: The process of perceiving smells. In order to smell things—that is, in order for olfaction to occur
—humans use two separate sensory areas. The first is the nasal cavity. AROMAS smelled via the nose are
said to occur by orthonasal olfaction. The other area is at the cavity at the back of the palate. Aromas
perceived this way—retronasally—happen as a result of wine first being warmed in the mouth and mixed with
saliva.
ORGANIC VITICULTURE: See box, page 35, in the chapter “Where It All Begins.”
OXIDATION: The process of exposing wine to air, which changes it. A little oxidation can be positive; it can
help to soften and open up a wine, for example. Too much exposure to air, however, is deleterious. It can
make a wine turn brown and take on a tired flavor. When too much exposure to air occurs, the wine is
described as oxidized.


P
PH: A measure of the strength of the relative acidity versus the relative alkalinity of wine (or any liquid) on a
logarithmic scale of 0 to 14. The lower the number is below 7 (the neutral pH of water), the greater the relative
acidity. Winemakers consider the pH of a wine in relationship to other factors (ALCOHOL, TANNIN,
EXTRACT, and the like) to determine if the wine is in BALANCE. As grapes mature, plotting the change in the
pH of their pulp is a way of determining ripeness.
PHENOLS: A group of chemical compounds occurring naturally in all plants. In wine, phenols are derived
from grape skins, stems, and seeds, as well as from oak barrels. Among the most important phenols are
TANNIN, COLOR pigments, and some flavor compounds, such as VANILLIN. Depending on their chemical
structure, some phenols are known as polyphenols.
PHYLLOXERA: A small, aphid-like insect that attacks the roots of vines belonging to the species VITIS
VINIFERA. Phylloxera slowly destroys the vine by preventing the roots from absorbing nutrients and water.
Native American vines, such as those belonging to the species VITIS LABRUSCA or Vitis riparia, tolerate the
insect without adverse consequences. In the latter part of the nineteenth century, a phylloxera epidemic swept
through Europe and eventually around the world. By the time a remedy was discovered, millions of acres of
vines had been destroyed. The remedy, still the only known solution, was to replant each vineyard, vine by
vine, with native American ROOTSTOCKS, then graft VITIS VINIFERA vines on top.
PIPE: In Victorian England, where a pipe of Port was commonly given to a newborn child as a gift, a pipe held
141.13 gallons (534.24 liters). Today, a pipe holds a volume ranging from 145.29 gallons (550 liters) to 166.42
gallons (630 liters), depending on the country they come from and whether they are used for maturing or
shipping a wine. Pipes commonly contain Port, Sherry, Madeira, Marsala, or Cognac.
POMACE: The mashed-up solid residue (skins, stems, seeds, pulp) that is left after grapes are pressed.
When pomace is distilled, it can be made into GRAPPA (Italy), MARC (France), or EAU-DE-VIE (France and
the United States).
PREMIUM WINES: In the 1980s, the California-based wine consulting and management company of
Gomberg, Fredrickson & Associates established a hierarchy of wines according to price. The hierarchy
includes four levels of premium wine—Popular Premium ($3–$7), Mid Premium ($7–$10), Super Premium
($10–$14), and Ultra Premium ($14–$25).
PRESS: To press means to exert pressure on grapes to extract their juices. A press is a device used to do
that. There are many kinds; one of the simplest and oldest is the hand-operated wooden basket press. A
more modern press—the bladder press—is essentially a horizontal tank with an inflatable membrane running
through its middle. As the membrane swells, it gently squeezes the grapes against the side of the revolving
tank. Grape bunches can be put whole into a press, but more often they are crushed and the stems are
removed first.
PRIVATE RESERVE: A term found on some NEW WORLD wine labels for which there is no legal definition.
Sometimes a wine labeled Private Reserve is truly special and of high quality (such as Beaulieu Vineyards’
Georges de Latour Private Reserve). Other times, however, the phrase is simply a hackneyed way of
marketing an ordinary wine. Similar terms include Proprietor’s Reserve and Grand Reserve.
PRODUCED AND BOTTLED BY: A term found on U.S. wine labels indicating that not less than 75 percent of
the wine was fermented at the address on the label and that the wine was bottled at that address. See
VINTED AND BOTTLED BY.
PRUNING: The removal of living canes, shoots, leaves, and other vegetative growth. Vines are usually
pruned in winter when the plant is dormant (and thus less susceptible to diseases that could infiltrate the vine
via the pruning wounds). Pruning is generally severe. About 90 percent of the previous season’s growth is
removed each year. Pruning keeps vines manageable and affects how the vine will grow in the following year.
Thus, pruning can be used to regulate the size and quality of the next year’s crop. Pruning is usually done by
hand with shears, but mechanical pruners do exist to speed up pruning in large vineyards, especially in
countries like Australia, where agricultural workers are in short supply.
PUCKERY: Used to describe a wine that is so high in TANNIN that it causes your mouth to pucker with
dryness. Most often the wine will have been made from insufficiently ripe grapes.
PULP: The soft, fleshy part of the grape, which is infused with juice.
PUMPING OVER: A process during the FERMENTATION of red wine in which the juice is pumped from the
bottom of the container to the top and then sprayed over the CAP of skins to break it up and keep it wet. By
trickling through this mass of skins, the juice picks up even more COLOR, flavor, and TANNIN. Pumping over
also helps prevent the growth of undesirable bacteria that might spoil the wine or create off flavors.
PUNCHEON: Modern puncheons, commonly used for wines like sangiovese that don’t benefit from a lot of
wood contact, come in two sizes: 79.25 gallons and 132.08 gallons (200 and 500 liters, respectively).
PUNCHING DOWN: The opposite of PUMPING OVER, this process accomplishes the same goals. During
punching down, the CAP is pushed down with a paddle into the fermenting grape juice. Punching down,
despite its name, is a gentle process.
PUNT: The indentation found in the bottom of most wine bottles. The punt may be shallow or, as in the case
of Champagne bottles, quite pronounced. The punt adds stability by weighting the bottom of the bottle and
strengthens the glass at its weakest point.
PYRAZINES: Molecular compounds in certain wines that give them a distinct green bell pepper flavor.
Pyrazines are found in high concentrations in the skins of cabernet sauvignon, sauvignon blanc, merlot, and
cabernet franc in particular. When these grapes do not get fully ripe, the pyrazine flavor is highly apparent.


Q
QVEVRI: A large earthenware vessel originating in Georgia around 6000 B.C. Lined with beeswax and sunk
into the ground to control temperature, it was traditionally used to ferment and store wine.


R
RACKING: A method of clarifying a wine that has SETTLED by siphoning or pumping off solids and
particulate matter, such as yeast cells and bits of grape skins, and pouring it into a different clean barrel.
Racking also AERATES a wine.
RAISINY: A descriptive term for a wine (generally a red) that tastes slightly like raisins because the grapes
were overripe when picked. A small bit of this quality can add an interesting nuance to the wine, but too much
is a flaw.
RESERVE: Many producers the world over make a reserve wine in addition to their regular offering, the
reserve being of higher quality (theoretically) and higher price (dependably). In the United States, a reserve
wine may be a selection of the best lots of wine from grapes grown in the best vineyards, and/or it may be a
wine that has been allowed to age longer before release. But since the term reserve is not actually defined by
United States law, an embarrassing number of producers use it purely as a marketing ploy to get you to buy
wine that is, in fact, of cheap quality and rather pedestrian. The one exception to this is Washington State,
where in 1999, an industry group, the Washington Wine Quality Alliance, set forth its own stipulations
regarding the term reserve. Members of the alliance—virtually all of the top wine producers in the state—
agreed to use the term reserve only for 10 percent of a winery’s production or 3,000 cases, whichever is
greater. Additionally, a wine labeled reserve must be among the higher-priced wines the winery produces, and
all of the grapes for the wine must be grown in Washington State. In contrast to the United States, most
European countries strictly define the terms reserve, RISERVA (Italy), RESERVA (Spain), and the like.
RESIDUAL SUGAR: Natural grape sugar that remains in wine because it has not been converted into
ALCOHOL during FERMENTATION. Wines that taste dry can nonetheless have a tiny amount of residual
sugar in them. Winemakers often leave small amounts of sugar in wine to make it seem rounder and more
appealing (sweetness has a slight fat feeling to it). Wine producers are not required to list residual sugar
content on labels.
RIDDLING: Called RÉMUAGE in French, riddling is the process during the making of Champagne or
SPARKLING WINE whereby the bottles are individually rotated and tilted a small bit day after day in order to
concentrate the yeast sediment in the necks prior to DISGORGING. In the past, bottles held in A-shape
frames called pupitres were riddled by hand. Today, it may also be done by a computerized machine called a
gyropalette.
ROOTSTOCK: The part of the grapevine that is planted directly in the soil. Rootstocks from different varieties
have different tolerances to disease and climatic stress and will be more or less suitable to a given type of
soil. The variety of rootstock also affects how slowly or quickly the vine itself will grow. A vine need not grow
from its own roots. In fact, most vines are not grown from their own roots but instead are grafted onto select
rootstocks that have been bred for their disease-resistant properties (see PHYLLOXERA and VITIS).
ROTTEN EGG: The term most often used to describe a wine that exhibits the fault of having excessive
hydrogen sulfide.
ROUGH: Used to describe the coarse texture of a (usually young) tannic red wine before it has begun to
round out. AGING can sometimes soften a rough wine.


S
SCION: The portion of the vine that is grafted onto the rootstock and determines the type of fruit grown by the
plant.
SEC: French for DRY. In wine, however, the opposite is usually true. Champagne that is labeled sec, for
example, is medium sweet to sweet.
SECONDARY FERMENTATION: A FERMENTATION that takes place after the first fermentation, either
spontaneously or by intention. In the making of top Champagnes and SPARKLING WINES, the secondary
fermentation takes place inside the bottle and produces the gas that eventually becomes the wines’ bubbles
(see CARBON DIOXIDE). In table wine, a secondary fermentation is undesirable.
SECOND CROP: Fruit that matures after the first crop has been picked. This is usually not picked because
the quantity is too small to be economically viable and the grapes may not be sufficiently ripe.
SECOND WINE: The term for a secondary and usually less expensive wine made by a winery. In Bordeaux,
for example, Château Latour’s second label is Les Forts de Latour. Most wineries that make a second label
are highly respected for their primary label and may not want to actively market (or be known for) their second
label. The wine that is sold under the second label is never as high in quality as wine of the primary label. The
grapes may come from younger vines and/or lesser vineyards.
SEDIMENT: The particulate matter (usually harmless) and color pigments that may precipitate out of a wine
as it ages. The presence of sediment is not negative; many of the best wines in the world throw off sediment
as they age.
SETTLING: The precipitation (settling out) of solid matter in wine. SEDIMENT, for example, settles out of a
mature wine.
SHATTER: A phenomenon that can occur in the spring whereby individual grape berries become separated
from the stem and fall to the ground. May be caused by cool, wet weather during early grape development,
which tends to prevent the tiny cap on each fertilized berry from falling off. Then as the berries start to grow,
they push against the cap and shatter, significantly reducing yields.
SHOOT: A new green stem that springs from the CORDON of the vine as it begins to grow in the spring. The
shoots will ultimately sprout leaves and clusters of grapes.
SHOOT THINNING: The act of removing some shoots in order to improve the quality of the fruit, as well as to
reduce vine stress. By thinning the shoots, the winegrower attempts to get the vine to put its energy into
ripening its clusters rather than growing green vegetative parts.
SKIN CONTACT: In a sense, all red wines experience skin contact since in red wine FERMENTATION the
juice and skins of the grapes are in contact. But in contemporary winemaking, the term skin contact generally
refers to the process of letting crushed white grapes sit with the skins and the juice together, rather than
immediately separating them. This process helps add flavor and AROMA to the final wine. A white wine may
be given anywhere from a few hours to a couple of days of skin-contact time.
SMALL BARREL: Although first used as a general term to describe any wooden container, barrels are now
used as specific measures. Three types of small barrels are standard around the world. French oak Bordeaux
barrels, known as barriques, are used for many types of wine, including cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and
Bordeaux. They hold 59.43 gallons (225 liters). French oak Burgundy barrels, known as pieces, are generally
used for pinot noirs worldwide, including Burgundies. They hold 60.2 gallons (228 liters). And American oak
barrels, used for all types of wine, are made in both sizes.
SMOKY: A smoky smell and taste found in both white and red wines. Though wines can take on smoky
characters from the barrels in which they are aged, certain wines just have a naturally smoky character as a
result of their TERROIR (see the French glossary). Many Pouilly-Fumés and Sancerres from France’s Loire
Valley are smoky, for example.
SOMMELIER: The French term for a wine steward, which has also been appropriated by the English
language. In American slang, the word sommelier is sometimes contracted to somm.
SOUR: A descriptive term, generally used negatively, for a wine with a flavor that, as far as the taster is
concerned, is too sharp and acidic.
SPARKLING WINE: A wine with bubbles. The most famous sparkling wine is Champagne, made in the region
of the same name in France. Other types of sparkling wine include CAVA (from Spain), SEKT (from
Germany), and PROSECCO (from Italy).
SPICY: A descriptive term for a wine with an AROMA or flavor suggestive of aromatic spices. Spicy wines are
also often peppery and can have a slight, pleasantly scratchy texture.
SPLIT: A small wine bottle containing 6.4 ounces (187.5 milliliters), one fourth of a standard 750 milliliter
bottle.
SPRITZY: Wines with a small amount of sparkle from carbonation left or trapped in the wine. In a still wine,
this is usually undesirable.
STARTER: Commercial YEASTS used to initiate and ensure fermentation.
STEMMY: A descriptive term for a wine with the green odor or flavor of stems or, sometimes, wet grain.
STILL WINES: All wines that are not SPARKLING WINES.
SULFUR: A natural chemical compound that has been used as a wine preservative since antiquity. The most
common form of sulfur used in wine making is sulfur dioxide (SO2), which is formed when elemental sulfur is
burned in air. Added to wine (usually as a gas), sulfur dioxide prevents OXIDATION as well as bacterial
spoilage, and it inhibits the growth of YEASTS. As a result of this, sulfur dioxide can be used to stop
FERMENTATION in order to produce a sweet wine, and it can be used to prevent MALOLACTIC
FERMENTATION. A form of sulfur dioxide known as metabisulfite is often added to freshly picked grapes
(and fruit juices in general) as a preservative. Sulfur dioxide’s disadvantage is that it has an unpleasant,
burnt-match odor, which can be smelled at low concentrations, although people vary widely in the thresholds
at which they can detect it. The ability to detect sulfur dioxide also varies based on the type of wine, since in
some wines the compound reacts to or combines with other compounds, rendering it more difficult to
perceive. In any case, during the last few decades, winemakers the world over have sought to minimize the
amount of sulfur dioxide they use in winemaking, mostly in response to health concerns voiced by wine
drinkers. Nonetheless, it’s virtually impossible to produce a wine that is entirely sulfur-free, because a small
amount of sulfur dioxide is a byproduct of the metabolic action of yeasts during fermentation (this is why
bread, too, contains sulfur dioxide). As a result, United States law mandates that the term “contains sulfites”
appear on all wine labels that contain more than 10 parts per million of sulphur dioxide (and most do), even
when the wine has been produced without the addition of any sulfur dioxide. The word sulfites in the warning
is a catchall term for sulfur in all its various forms, including sulfur dioxide, sulfurous acid, bisulfite ion, and
sulfite ion, as well as other complex forms. Sulfur in all its forms is harmless to people except for the tiny
number of individuals who are severely allergic to it..
SUR LIE: Literally, “on the lees.” Some white wines, notably white Burgundies, are, for a period of time, left in
contact with the lees (spent YEAST) after FERMENTATION is complete. Wines that have been left take on a
creamy, rounder MOUTHFEEL and generally display more complex flavors.
SUSTAINABLE VITICULTURE: See box, page 35 in the chapter “Where It All Begins.”


T
TABLE WINE: The term used around the world to describe wines of moderate alcoholic strength (usually 9 to
15 percent ALCOHOL BY VOLUME) as opposed to FORTIFIED wines, which have grape spirits added to
them and thus are stronger in alcoholic strength (usually between 16 and 20 percent alcohol by volume). In
common speech, however, the term table wine is often used to indicate dry, STILL WINES served to
accompany dinner, rather than sweet wines intended for dessert or SPARKLING WINES.
TANNIN: A PHENOL (a kind of compound) derived from the skins, seeds, and stems of grapes and from
barrels. The presence of tannin is beneficial, for it gives red wines a firm structure as well as the potential for
aging. Tannin is both tasted and felt. When young, highly tannic wines have a slight bitterness (like espresso
or chocolate) and a drying, astringent feel. If the wine has been made from mature grapes with ripe tannin,
the bitter, dry quality will be ameliorated. Excessively dry, harsh, scratchy tannin is a negative and may never
ameliorate. Harsh tannin, often called green or unripe tannin, most often results when grapes have been
picked before they are completely physiologically mature. Most white wines have only tiny amounts of tannin
because they are not fermented on their skins.
TARTRATES: Tasteless, odorless, harmless bits of tartaric ACID that can precipitate out of a wine that has
not been COLD STABILIZED. Tartrates look like small white snowflakes.
TASTEVIN: See the French glossary.
TERPENE: An organic compound that is produced by a variety of plants, including grapevines, which can
produce a strong aroma. It is found in higher concentrations mostly in gewürztraminer, muscat, riesling, and
other German crosses. Muscat has one of the highest concentrations of terpenes, and, therefore, its
characteristic aroma can often be said to smell of “terpene.”
TERROIR: See the French glossary.
THIN: Used to describe a wine lacking body, because it is low in ALCOHOL, as well as lacking fruit flavors,
possibly because it was made from grapes produced at a very high YIELD. An extremely thin wine tastes
watery.
TOASTING: Charring the inside of new barrels over an open flame. Charring caramelizes the staves of the
wood. Wine stored in barrels treated this way will pick up a VANILLIN, toasty character.
TOPPING UP: To add more wine to a barrel or container to replace any wine lost through evaporation, and
thereby prevent the wine from experiencing OXIDATION. The term is also used in more general
circumstances to mean adding wine to a glass in which there’s only a sip or two left.
TRANSFER PROCESS: A less expensive way of making SPARKLING WINE than the traditional MÉTHODE
CHAMPENOISE (see the French Glossary). In the transfer process, the SECONDARY FERMENTATION
takes place in the individual bottles (as it does in Champagne), but then instead of RIDDLING and
DISGORGING each bottle, the wine is emptied into large tanks where these two processes take place under
pressure. Finally, the wine is filtered, a DOSAGE (see the French glossary) is added, and the wine is
rebottled.
TRUNK: The vine’s permanent vertical stem, which grows out of the ground.
TYPICITY: A quality that a wine possesses if it is typical of its region and reflects the characteristics of the
grape variety from which it came. Whether or not a wine demonstrates typicity is pretty subjective. It also has
nothing to do with how good the wine tastes. A wine can be quite delicious and nonetheless show no typicity.
A rich, full-bodied, buttery, oaky Sancerre, for example, would not have typicity, since Sancerres are typically
lean, minerally, and zesty, and have tangy flavors. In certain OLD WORLD countries, an evaluation of typicity,
even though it’s subjective, is required by law in order for a wine to obtain APPELLATION status.


U
ULLAGE: The space that develops near the neck and shoulder inside a wine bottle or container because wine
has been lost through leakage or evaporation. In a bottle with significant ullage, the wine will often be
OXIDIZED and spoiled. In a wine auction, a wine with ullage will not command top dollar.
UNFILTERED: Used to describe a wine that has not been FILTERED to clarify it and remove any unwanted
YEASTS or bacteria. Winemakers who believe that filtering strips wine of some flavors and texture may leave
their wines unfiltered and may even label them as such. An unfiltered wine will often undergo FINING to
remove large particles in suspension as well as coarse TANNIN. Unfiltered wines are sometimes less than
brilliantly clear.
UNFINED: A wine that has not gone through FINING to remove large particulate matter and some tannins. As
with FILTERING, many winemakers believe fining can harm the flavor and texture of the wine. An unfined
wine may still be filtered.
UNOAKED: A wine that has been fermented and aged in stainless-steel or concrete vessels, instead of oak.
This style gives the wine more clarity and purity of fruit.


V
VANILLIN: A compound in oak barrels that is ultimately imparted to wine as a flavor and smell reminiscent of
vanilla. New barrels have more vanillin than older barrels, and hence wine stored in new barrels has a more
pronounced vanilla character.
VARIETAL: Wine made from a particular variety of grape. Chardonnay, riesling, pinot noir, cabernet
sauvignon, and so on are all varietal wines. In general, each varietal has a unique flavor, distinct from other
varietals. When a wine has a pronounced varietal flavor, it is said to have varietal character. On January 1,
1983, United States law established that a wine named after a grape—a varietal—must contain 75 percent or
more of that grape variety and must have been grown in the appellation of origin appearing on the label. Prior
to that date, a varietally labeled wine had to contain 51 percent or more of the named grape.
VEGETAL: Used to describe a wine with off-putting AROMAS and flavors reminiscent of stewed or canned
green beans, asparagus, artichokes, and the like.
VERAISON: The change of color of the grape berries, signaling the onset of ripening. White grapes go from
green to yellow, and red grapes go from green to red.
VINEGARY: Describes a wine with the harsh aroma of vinegar, usually produced by ACETIC acid.
Considered a major fault in a wine.
VINICULTURE: The science of winemaking. The term is used much less frequently than ENOLOGY.
VINIFERA: See VITIS.
VINOUS: Winelike. Europeans sometimes criticize California wines as being too fruity and so not vinous
enough.
VINTAGE: The year the grapes were grown and harvested. A vintage year appears on the labels of most
wines, though some famous wines—nonvintage Champagne, Sherry, and many styles of Port, for example—
never carry a vintage date because they are blends of wines from several different years. In the United
States, most wines bottled with a vintage date are made up entirely of grapes from that year. Technically,
however, United States law requires only that 95 percent of the wine comes from grapes harvested in the
year appearing on the label.
VINTAGE CHAMPAGNE: Champagne made from a single year’s harvest. Aged a minimum of three years
and often four or five. Called MILLÉSIME in French.
VINTED AND BOTTLED BY: A term found on United States wine labels, indicating that the wine was bottled
at the address on the label and that some cellar treatment (such as aging) was performed at the address on
the label. However, vinted and bottled by does not mean that the wine was necessarily fermented at the
address on the label. See PRODUCED AND BOTTLED BY.
VINTNER: A person who makes or sells wine. Often used to describe the owner of a winery who may also
employ a winemaker.
VISCOSITY: The character some wines possess of being somewhat syrupy and slow to move around in the
mouth. A spoonful of honey, for example, is more viscous than a spoonful of water, and ALCOHOL, by its
nature, is viscous. Thus both sweet wines and wines with high alcohol are more viscous than dry wines and
wines low in alcohol.
VITICULTURE: The science of growing grapes.
VITIS: The genus of the plant kingdom to which grapevines belong. Within the genus Vitis there are some
sixty separate species. The most famous species—and the only one to have originated in Europe—is VITIS
VINIFERA, which includes all of the well-known wine grapes: chardonnay, pinot noir, cabernet sauvignon, and
so on (and accounts for virtually all of the wines made today). Most species of vines, however, originated in
North America. These include VITIS LABRUSCA, Vitis riparia, Vitis rupestris, Vitis rotundifolia, and Vitis
berlandieri, among others.
VITIS LABRUSCA: American vine species that generally produces wines that are far less sophisticated and
complex than vinifera varieties. In particular, labrusca grapes are easily recognizable by their pungent,
candylike aroma and flavor, usually described as FOXY. Concord, for example, is a grape variety that belongs
to the species Vitis labrusca. Over centuries, many American species have hybridized by chance. In addition,
from 1880 to 1950, plant scientists in both France and the United States intentionally created HYBRIDS by
crossing vinifera varieties with hardier, more disease- and pest-resistant American varieties. While their use
for wine is declining, hybrids remain critically important as ROOTSTOCKS. Two other North American vine
species are Vitis riparia and Vitis rotundifolia. Although no well-known wines are made from these species,
they are very resistant to PHYLLOXERA and so are frequently used for root-stocks. French/American hybrids
such as baco noir are also made with these species.
VITIS VINIFERA: A vine species accounting for most of the wines made in the world today. Such grapes as
chardonnay, cabernet sauvignon, pinot noir, syrah, and riesling are all Vitis vinifera varieties. Vitis vinifera
originated in Europe and the Middle East.
VOLATILE ACIDITY: All wines have a tiny amount of volatile acidity, usually, with any luck, imperceptible. In
excess, V.A., as it is known, causes a wine to have an unpleasantly sharp, vinegary aroma. Volatile acidity
occurs because unwanted bacteria have produced ACETIC acid, the result of poor winemaking.


Y
YEASTS: Single-celled microorganisms used to convert sugar to alcohol and carbon dioxide during
fermentation.
YEASTY: In STILL WINES, yeasty describes an AROMA suggestive of the yeasts used in FERMENTATION.
The quality should not be pronounced. In Champagne and SPARKLING WINES, it refers to the aroma of
bread dough, considered positive and often the result of long aging on the LEES.
YIELD: The measure of how much a vineyard produces. In general, very high yields are associated with low-
quality wine, and low yields are associated with high-quality wine. However, the relationship of yield of grapes
to wine quality is extremely complex and not linear. Thus, a yield of 2 tons per acre does not necessarily
produce better wine than a yield of 3 tons per acre, which doesn’t necessarily portend better wine than if the
yield were 4 tons per acre. Every vineyard is different, and yield must always be considered in light of multiple
other factors, including the variety of grape, the type of CLONE, the age of the vine, the particular
ROOTSTOCK, and the TERROIR. In Europe, yield is measured in hectoliters per hectare (one hectoliter
equals 26.4 gallons; one hectare equals 2.47 acres). The unofficial French dictum is that great red wine
cannot be made from yields of more than 50 hectoliters per hectare. In the United States, yield is generally
measured in tons of grapes per acre. Roughly speaking, 1 ton per acre equals 15 hectoliters per hectare.
Yields in the United States can range from less than 1 ton per acre to 10 or more. This said, the way yield is
thought about in the United States is changing as a result of new vineyards, many of which are now planted
so that the vines are much more closely spaced than they were in the past. With such vineyards, viticulturists
talk of pounds of grapes per vine, rather than tons per acre.
FRENCH WINE TERMS

A
APPELLATION D’ORIGINE CONTRÔLÉE (AOC): See page 137.
ASSEMBLAGE: A Champagne or SPARKLING WINE term that refers to the blending, or assembling, of still
wines before the SECONDARY FERMENTATION, which creates the bubbles.


B
BAUMÉ: The scale used in France and much of the rest of Europe for measuring sugar in grapes and, hence,
their ripeness. Other scales for measuring sugar include BRIX (used in the United States) and OECHSLE
(used in Germany).
BAN DES VENDANGES: Literally, “opening of the harvest”—the official date when harvest can begin.
Growers can choose to begin harvest anytime after the ban des vendanges but not before it. A ban des
vendanges is mandatory in some (but not all) AOCs, including Champagne and Burgundy. Within a given
area, the ban des vendanges differs depending on the grape variety and location of the vineyard.
BLANC DE BLANCS: Literally, “white from whites.” A golden Champagne or SPARKLING WINE made
entirely from white grapes, usually chardonnay grapes.
BLANC DE NOIRS: Literally, “white from blacks.” A golden Champagne or SPARKLING WINE made from
black (noir) grapes. (The French refer to red grapes as black.) It is possible to make a white wine from red
grapes because the juice and PULP of red-skinned grapes is white. Blanc de noirs are usually made from
pinot noir, but pinot meunier may be used in some cases. Very few Champagne houses produce blanc de
noirs Champagnes. The practice is more common among makers of Californian sparkling wines.
BOUCHON: A type of restaurant in Lyon, France, known for serving traditional Lyonnaise dishes, which are
heavy on meat and fat. The goal of a bouchon is not haute cuisine but a friendly and personal atmosphere.
There are about 20 certified bouchons in Lyon, although many more proclaim themselves to be. Bouchon
also refers to a stopper for the mouth of a wine bottle, most often a sparkling wine, as it prevents the bubbles
from escaping.
BOTRYTIS CINEREA: See Main Glossary.
BRUT: A DRY to very dry Champagne or SPARKLING WINE containing less than 15 grams of sugar per liter
(equal to 1.5 percent residual sugar). EXTRA BRUT is slightly drier than brut.


C
CÉPAGE NOBLE: Cépage means “grape variety.” The so-called noble grape varieties—cépages nobles—are
those that consistently make fine wine, such as cabernet sauvignon, pinot noir, or chardonnay.
CHAI: Above-ground facility used to store wine.
CHAPTALIZATION: See Main Glossary.
CHÂTEAU: A building where wine is made and around which vines grow. Despite the images most of us have
of palatial estates, such as Bordeaux’s regal Château Margaux, a château can be as humble as a garage.
The names of most Bordeaux estates are preceded by the word château, though the word is used
infrequently elsewhere in France and never in Burgundy, where the roughly equivalent term would be
DOMAINE.
CLIMAT: The term used especially in Burgundy to mean a specific field or plot. Each climat is distinguished by
its own soil, climate, orientation to the sun, slope, drainage capacity, and so on.
CLOS: A term used especially in Burgundy to indicate a vineyard enclosed by a wall. One of Burgundy’s
largest and most famous walled vineyards is Clos Vougeot.
COMMUNE: A small village that is often an APPELLATION. In Bordeaux, the communes of Margaux,
Pauillac, St.-Julien, and St.-Estèphe are famous appellations. Communes are also the lowest level of
administrative division in France, and as such, are the equivalent of incorporated cities in the United States.
COULURE: The failure of grapes to develop after flowering occurs. Weather conditions during the spring,
such as clouds and cold temperatures, wind, rain, and high temperatures, can cause the flowers to stay
closed or drop off the vine, and therefore not become fertilized. Each flower represents a potential grape, and
vines that experience coulure, sometimes called SHATTER in English, often have irregular bunches that are
missing grapes.
CRAYÈRES: Deep chalk pits used by Champagne houses to age Champagne. Originally dug by the Romans
in A.D. 300 to source stones for building the city of Reims, these cold, dark, humid chambers are as deep as
60 feet underground and are shaped like a pyramid, with the bottom of the pit being the widest.
CRÉMANT: Today the word crémant is reserved for French SPARKLING WINES made outside the
Champagne region using the MÉTHODE CHAMPENOISE. Important examples include Crémant d’Alsace,
Crémant de Bourgogne, and Crémant de Loire. Since 1994, the term has not been permitted to be used in
Champagne. It was once used to describe a Champagne with about half the usual effervescence, often called
a creaming wine. These half-sparkling Champagnes are still made, but today they are given proprietary
names.
CRU: Translated in English as “growth,” the word cru can mean a vineyard or an estate, usually a superior
one, that has been classified geographically or by reputation. A classified cru is known as a cru classé. Within
any given classification (such as those in Bordeaux and Burgundy), there are Premiers Crus (first growths),
Grands Crus (great growths), and so on. The word is the past participle of the French verb croître, meaning
“to grow.”
CUVÉE: The wine from a selected barrel or vat (the term is derived from the French cuve, meaning “vat”). In
Champagne, however, the word cuvée is used to describe a blend of wines. A Champagne cuvée is often
made up of different varieties of grapes, or grapes from different vineyard plots, or both. The term prestige
cuvée is used in Champagne to refer to a house’s most expensive and prestigious wine. Dom Pérignon, for
example, is the prestige cuvée of Moët & Chandon.
CUVERIE: The building that houses FERMENTATION tanks or vats. The place where the wine ferments.


D
DÉGORGEMENT: Disgorgement (see DISGORGING in Main Glossay)—the process of removing the yeasty
sediments from a Champagne bottle after the second, bubble-forming FERMENTATION.
DEMI-SEC: A sweet Champagne or SPARKLING WINE containing 33 to 50 grams of sugar per liter (equal to
3.3 to 5 percent residual sugar). Demi-sec is sweeter than EXTRA DRY, which is sweeter than BRUT.
DE PRIMEUR: Wines that are sold and drunk very young. The most famous of these is Beaujolais Nouveau,
although dozens of French wines are allowed by law to be sold the year the grapes were harvested. Not to be
confused with EN PRIMEUR.
DOMAINE: A wine-producing estate. Many wineries throughout France incorporate the word in their names,
especially Burgundian estates, the most famous of which is the Domaine de la Romanée-Conti.
DOSAGE: The degree of sweetness of the LIQUEUR D’EXPÉDITION, which is used to top up Champagne
before its final corking. The dosage is what determines whether a Champagne will be BRUT, EXTRA DRY,
DEMI-SEC, and so on.


E
EAU-DE-VIE: Literally, water of life. Eaux-de-vie (the plural) are grape spirits, or clear brandies, that have
been made by distilling wine or POMACE.
ENCÉPAGEMENT: The various grape varieties used in any given wine.
EN COTEAUX: Vines planted on slopes, usually making superior wine.
EN PRIMEUR: A method of buying wherein the wine is bought before it is released. Also known as buying
futures. Buying wine en primeur allows collectors to be more certain of securing given wines. The wines most
likely to be sold en primeur are Bordeaux wines from top châteaux.
EXTRA BRUT: A very DRY Champagne or SPARKLING WINE, with minimal (less than 0.6 percent) added
sweetness. Drier than BRUT.
EXTRA DRY: Slightly sweeter than BRUT, contains extra dry Champagne or SPARKLING WINE. Do not
confuse extra dry with EXTRA BRUT, which is the driest dosage level.


F
FOUDRE: Large wooden vat used to age wines.


G
GARIGUE: A word used to describe the arid landscape of Provence and the southern Rhône, which is
covered with dry scrub and tough, resiny wild herbs, such as rosemary, thyme, and lavender. The wines of
Provence and the southern Rhône are said to smell and taste of garigue (garrigue in French).
GOÛT DE TERROIR: The distinctive taste of a given grape variety grown in a specific TERROIR.
GRANDE MARQUE: A member of a particular association of about thirty of the longest-established
Champagne HOUSES. The Syndicat de Grandes Marques is devoted to upholding a written charter of high
standards in the production of Champagne.


H
HOUSE: As used in the Champagne region, house refers to a producer who sells Champagne under its own
brand name. The grapes may come from its own vineyards, from independent growers, or most often from a
combination of the two. Such firms as Veuve Clicquot, Moët & Chandon, and Taittinger are all referred to as
houses.


L
LEFT BANK: The term refers to all of the appellations of Bordeaux that are on the left side of the Gironde
River as it flows out to the Atlantic Ocean. The main grape variety used for Left Bank wines is cabernet
sauvignon. Many famous communes are on the Left Bank, such as Margaux, St.-Julien, Pauillac, St.-
Estéphe, Graves, and Sauternes.
LIQUEUR D’EXPÉDITION: The wine added to the Champagne bottle after DISGORGING to top it up. The
liqueur d’expédition is often made up of wines reserved from previous years and it contains some sweetness
(known as the DOSAGE).
LIQUEUR DE TIRAGE: The mixture of wine and sugar added along with YEASTS to the blend of still wines in
a Champagne bottle in order to induce the second, bubble-forming fermentation.


M
MACÉRATION CARBONIQUE: CARBONIC MACERATION, as it is referred to in English, is a type of
FERMENTATION in which uncrushed grapes are placed whole into vats that are then closed. As the weight of
the grapes on top crushes grapes on the bottom, juice is released and fermentation begins. This in turn
releases the gas CARBON DIOXIDE (CO2), which causes other grapes to ferment, in effect, within their
skins. Carbonic maceration is commonly used to ferment fruity red wines for early drinking, typically in
Beaujolais and sometimes in the Loire.
MARC: The French term for an EAU-DE-VIE made specifically by distilling the POMACE (grape skins, stems,
and seeds) left over after pressing, not by distilling wine. Marc is generally a slightly more powerfully flavored
spirit than eau-de-vie.
MAS: The southern French term for a DOMAINE, sometimes translated as “farm.”
MÉTHODE CHAMPENOISE: The labor-intensive method used to make Champagne and other fine
SPARKLING WINES. In this method, the wine undergoes a SECONDARY FERMENTATION, which creates
the bubbles, in its individual bottle rather than in one large cask or vat.
MILLERANDAGE: A viticultural problem caused by abnormal pollination and fruit set. It results in differently
sized berries with different numbers of seeds within one bunch. The yield of the crop is reduced, although
some winemakers believe the smaller berries can increase the quality of the wine.
MILLÉSIME: A vintage Champagne.
MOELLEUX: A term commonly used in the Loire for very sweet, luscious white wines that can be almost
syrupy.
MONOPOLE: Used most frequently in Burgundy and to a lesser extent in Champagne, a monopole is a
vineyard owned entirely by one estate.
MOUSSE: The French term for the snowy layer of bubbles that form on the top of a poured glass of
Champagne or SPARKLING WINE.
MOUSSEUX: French for “sparkling.” Some VIN MOUSSEUX are made by the MÉTHODE CHAMPENOISE
(with SECONDARY FERMENTATION taking place in the bottle); other less expensive mousseux are made in
large tanks.
MUSELET: Meaning “muzzle” in English, a muselet is the wire cage that holds a Champagne or SPARKLING
WINE cork in place. It is important when opening a bottle of bubbly safely. The muselet should not be
removed before the cork is eased out. Rather, it should be loosened and then removed with the cork at the
same time.


N
NÉGOCIANT: An individual or firm that buys grapes and/or ready-made wine from growers and/or
cooperatives. The négociant then blends, bottles, labels, and sells the wine under its own brand or name. The
first négociant houses were established in France around the time of the French Revolution. The sudden
profusion of peasant growers who were inexperienced in sales created the need for firms that could bottle
and sell the production from many small properties.
NOUVEAU: A young wine meant for immediate drinking, usually seven to ten weeks after being made. The
most famous wine made in a nouveau style is Beaujolais Nouveau.


O
OEIL DE PERDRIX: Literally, “partridge eye,” oeil de perdrix is the term used to describe the color of a pale
rosé.


P
PRISE DE MOUSSE: Literally, “capturing the sparkle,” a term for the SECONDARY FERMENTATION in
Champagne. The secondary fermentation takes place inside each individual bottle. It is this secondary
fermentation that creates Champagne’s bubbles.


R
RÉMUAGE: The RIDDLING (rotating and tilting) of Champagne bottles to concentrate yeast sediments in
their necks. Riddling is done by hand in A-shape frames called pupitres or by a computerized machine called
a gyropalette.
RIGHT BANK: The term refers to all of the appellations of Bordeaux that are on the right side of the Gironde
River as it flows out to the Atlantic Ocean. The main grape varieties used for Right Bank wines are merlot and
cabernet franc. The well-known communes of Pomerol and St.-Emilion reside on the Right Bank.
ROSÉ CHAMPAGNE: A pink Champagne. The rosé color, which actually ranges from translucent pink to
coppery salmon, is obtained either by blending a bit of still red wine into the Champagne blend before the
SECONDARY FERMENTATION or by leaving the base wines in contact with the grape skins for a brief period
of time to absorb color. Because rosé Champagnes are difficult and risky to make, production is limited and
the wines are generally more expensive than golden Champagnes.


S
SAIGNÉE: A process used to make rosé by drawing pink-colored juice off fermenting red grapes. This
process also results in concentrating the remaining red wine, since the ratio of skins to juice in the tank is
increased when some juice is drawn off.
SEC: DRY. However, when sec appears on a Champagne or SPARKLING WINE label, the wine inside will be
medium sweet to sweet.
SÉLECTION DE GRAINS NOBLES: In Alsace, the term for wines made from very-late-picked berries that
have been affected by BOTRYTIS CINEREA.
SUR LIE: Literally, “on the LEES.” For a period of time after fermentation is complete, some white wines,
notably white Burgundies, are left in contact with the lees (spent YEASTS). Wines that have been left sur lie
take on a creamy, rounder MOUTHFEEL and generally display more COMPLEX flavors.


T
TASTEVIN: A shallow, silver tasting cup used by a SOMMELIER. The cup was designed with dimpled sides
that would reflect candlelight in dark cellars and thereby allow the sommelier to see the color of the wine.
TERROIR: French term for the sum entity and effect (no single word exists in English) of every environmental
factor on a given piece of ground. Included within terroir, for example, are a vineyard’s soil, slope, orientation
to the sun, and elevation, plus every nuance of climate: rainfall, wind velocity, frequency of fog, cumulative
hours of sunshine, average high temperatures, average low temperatures, and so on. Each vineyard is said
to have its own terroir.


V
VENDANGE TARDIVE: In Alsace, the term for wines made from late-picked, very ripe grapes. VT wines, as
they are called, are not as sweet as SELECTION DE GRAINS NOBLES nor are they botrytized.
VIGNERON: Literally, “vine grower.” Many French winemakers refer to themselves as vignerons.
VIN DE GARDE: A wine to save—in other words, a wine that can and should receive AGING.
VIN DE PAYS: Country wine—an everyday wine from a specific region, but less rigorously controlled than a
wine with an APPELLATION D’ORIGINE CONTRÔLÉE.
VIN DE TABLE: Table wine. Generally used to indicate a simple wine without APPELLATION D’ORIGINE
CONTRÔLÉE status.
VIN GRIS: A very pale rosé wine, sometimes light gray in color.
VIN LIQUOREUX: A very sweet, syrupy white wine, generally made from grapes affected by BOTRYTIS
CINEREA.
VIN MOUSSEUX: SPARKLING WINE, made either by SECONDARY FERMENTATION in bottle or in tank, or
by the addition of carbon dioxide for inexpensive wines.
VIN ORDINAIRE: Literally, “ordinary wine”—a plain wine with no regional or VARIETAL characteristics. An
everyday drinking wine, vin ordinaire is the opposite of VIN DE GARDE, a wine to save; that is, a wine with
aging potential.
ITALIAN WINE TERMS

A
ABBADIA: The term for “abbey,” sometimes shortened to just badia. Buildings that were once abbeys have
often been converted into renowned Italian wine estates, such as Tuscany’s Badia a Coltibuono.
ABBOCCATO: Slightly sweet.
AMABILE: A little sweeter than ABBOCCATO.
AMARO: Bitter. Many Italian wines, both white and red, have a slight amaro character, which is considered a
positive attribute by Italians.
ANNATA: The year of the vintage.
APPASIMENTO: The process of drying grapes on mats or shelving (or hanging them in the air) in protected
cool, dry lofts. There, the grapes shrivel and raisinate, concentrating their sugars.
ASCIUTTO: Totally DRY.
AZIENDA AGRICOLA: Wine estate—this term, sometimes abbreviated Az. Ag., often appears on wine labels,
along with the actual name of the wine estate, when the grapes were grown on that estate, and the wine that
was produced there as well.
AZIENDA VINICOLA: The term for a winery. It often appears on wine labels.
AZIENDA VITIVINICOLA: Grape-growing and wine-making company. Like AZIENDA AGRICOLA and
AZIENDA VINICOLA, the term often appears on wine labels.


B
BIANCO: White, as in vino bianco: white wine.
BOTTE: Cask or barrel.
BOTTIGLIA: Bottle.
BRICCO: The sunny slope of a hill.


C
CANTINA: Wine cellar, or yet another term for a winery.
CANTINA SOCIALE OR COOPERATIVA: A growers’ cooperative cellar. Italy, like France and Spain, has
hundreds of wine co-ops, some of which make good but rarely great wine.
CASA VINICOLA: A wine firm, usually making wine from wine or grapes it has purchased (as opposed to
grapes grown on its own estate). The word casa means “house.”
CASCINA: Northern Italian term for a farmhouse or estate.
CASTELLO: The word for “castle.” Several famous Italian wine estates are housed in what were once castles
—Castello dei Rampolla in Tuscany, for example.
CHIARETTO: A very light red or even a rosé wine.
CLASSICO: An official designation, referring to the heart of a DOC zone—by implication the classic or best
part. In Chianti, the classico zone is so highly regarded that it has a DOC of its own—Chianti Classico.
CONSORZIO: A consortium of producers of a certain wine, who join forces to control and promote it.
COOPERATIVA: See CANTINA SOCIALE.


D
DENOMINAZIONE DI ORIGINE CONTROLLATA (DOC): See page 328.
DENOMINAZIONE DI ORIGINE CONTROLLATA EGARANTITA (DOCG): See page 328.
DOLCE: Fully sweet. Italy produces countless sweet wines from many different grape varieties.


E
ENOTECA: Wine library; a place where bottles of wine from different regions are displayed. Often these
wines are also available for tasting. The most famous enoteca in Italy is in Siena. Today, enoteca is also used
to indicate a wine bar.
ETICHETTA: Label.


F
FATTORIA: Tuscan term for a farm or wine estate. Many top Chianti producers use this term as part of their
names—Fattoria di Felsina, for example.
FIASCO: Literally, “a flask”; more often used for the straw-encased Chianti bottle that was a fixture of the
bohemian lifestyle in the 1960s in the United States. Chiantis sold in fiaschi (the plural) were usually pretty
thin and quite cheap. Today, very few Chiantis are sold in straw-covered bottles.
FRIZZANTE: Slightly fizzy, but less so than SPARKLING WINE.


G
GRADAZIONE ALCOOLICA: Percentage of ALCOHOL BY VOLUME.
GRAN SELEZIONE: Highest-quality category in Chianti Classico. Wine must be made from estate-grown
grapes and aged at least 30 months before it is sold.
GRAPPA: A clear brandy (EAU-DE-VIE in French) made by distilling the POMACE left over after MUST or
wine is pressed. Grappa di monovitigno is a grappa from a single grape variety, such as moscato or picolit.
Because grappas made this way have a subtle suggestion of the AROMA and flavor of the original grapes,
they are considered superior.


I
IMBOTTIGLIATO ALL’ORIGINE: Bottled at the source; the term may be used only by estates that produce
and bottle the wine on the property where the grapes were grown.
IMBOTTIGLIATO DA: Bottled by, which will be followed by the producer’s name; does not denote an ESTATE
BOTTLED wine.
IMBOTTIGLIATO DAL VITICOLTORE: Bottled by the grower; may be used only by growers bottling their own
wines.
INDICAZIONE GEOGRAFICA TIPICA (IGT): See page 328.


L
LIQUOROSO: Strong wine, often but not necessarily FORTIFIED, which can be sweet or not.


M
METODO TRADIZIONALE: The Champagne method (MÉTHODE CHAMPENOISE) for making SPARKLING
WINE; also referred to as metodo classico. Most top Italian sparkling wines are made this way.


N
NERO: Black or very dark red; said of both grapes and wines.
P
PASSITO: The general term for wines made from intentionally raisinated grapes.
PASTOSO: Medium (not very) dry.
PODERE: A small farm, often turned into a wine estate. These often use the word podere in their names, as
in the Tuscan Podere Il Palazzino.
PRODUTTORE: Producer.


R
RECIOTO: A word indicating the wine is sweet (as in recioto di Soave and recioto di Valpolicella). To make a
recioto wine, the grapes are left for months to dry and raisinate, usually on mats or shelving in cool, dry lofts
(a process called APPASSIMENTO). In Italy, the general term for wines made from intentionally raisinated
grapes is passito. The word recioto comes from recie in the Venetian dialect, meaning “ears”—a reference to
the little lobes or ears on a grape cluster that usually get very ripe because they are the most exposed to the
sun.
RISERVA: A wine that has been matured for a specific number of years, according to DENOMINAZIONE DI
ORIGINE CONTROLLATA regulations.
ROSATO: Rosé.
ROSSO: Red. Vino rosso is distinguished from vino bianco (white wine) and vino rosato (rosé wine).


S
SECCO: DRY.
SEMISECCO: Semidry; in reality, medium sweet.
SORI: The sunny top of a hill where the snow melts first.
SPUMANTE: Sparkling; literally, “foaming.”
STRAVECCHIO: Very old; a term more frequently applied to spirits than wine.
SUPERIORE: Generally indicates a wine of higher quality, often because it has more alcohol than the
minimum required and/or it has been aged longer than regulations stipulate. Valpolicella Superiore, for
example, is a Valpolicella with at least one year of aging, in contrast to basic Valpolicella, which has no
minimum.


T
TENUTA: Holding or estate. Wine estates often incorporate the word tenuta into their names, as in the
Tuscan estate Tenuta San Guido.


U
UE: A softer, lighter type of GRAPPA achieved by distilling actual grapes rather than POMACE.
UVA: Grape.


V
VECCHIO: Old; said of mature wines.
VENDEMMIA: The vintage; can be used in place of ANNATA on labels.
VIGNA: Vineyard, also referred to as a vigneto.
VIGNAIOLO: Grape-grower, also called a viticoltore.
VILLA: Country manor; often one where wine is produced.
VINO DA ARROSTO: Wine for a roast, implying a red that is FULL-BODIED and has a deep COLOR.
VINO DA PASTO: Everyday wine.
VINO DA TAVOLA: Table wine—the regulation term for non-DOC wines.
VINO NOVELLO: The wine of the current year, now used in the same sense as Beaujolais Nouveau, though
Italy’s vino novellos are not as highly promoted as France’s Beaujolais Nouveau.
VITE: Vine.
VITICOLTORE: Grape grower.
VITIGNO: Grape variety.
SPANISH WINE TERMS

A
AÑADA: See VENDIMIA.
AÑO: Year.


B
BODEGA: Wine cellar or wine-producing company. Curiously, a single wine company may nonetheless use
the plural form bodegas in its name, as in Bodegas Ismael Arroyo.


C
CAVA: The name for Spanish SPARKLING WINE made by the Champagne method (MÉTHODE
CHAMPENOISE). Cava is a specialty of the Penedès region of north-central Spain near Barcelona. The two
largest cava producers, Freixenet and Codorníu, each produce far more sparkling wine by the Champagne
method than any Champagne house makes.
CONSEJO REGULADOR: Local governing body that enforces wine policy for a given area, including the
boundaries of the area, the grape varieties permitted, maximum YIELD, and so forth. Every Spanish wine
region with a DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN has a Consejo Regulador.
COSECHA: Year of harvest, or vintage.
CRIADERA: Literally, “nursery.” Criadera refers to a layer of Sherry casks, all of which contain wine of
approximately the same age and blend. Multiple criaderas, sometimes more than a dozen, make up a
SOLERA.
CRIANZA: The basic-quality wine produced by each BODEGA. Crianzas are considered every-night drinking
wines. They are less prestigious, less costly, and aged for shorter periods than RESERVAS or GRAN
RESERVAS. While national law stipulates that crianzas must be aged for a minimum of six months in oak
barrels, each DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN or DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN CALIFICADA can set higher
standards. In Rioja, for example, a crianza must be aged for at least two years, one of which must be in oak
barrels.


D
DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN (DO): See page 925.
DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN CALIFICADA (DOCA): See page 925.
DULCE: Sweet. Spain has less of a reputation for making top-quality sweet wines than France, Italy, or
Germany, although several styles of Sherry, Spain’s extraordinary FORTIFIED wine, can be sweet.


E
ELABORADO POR: Produced by.
EMBOTELLADO POR: Bottled by.
EN RAMA: Literally, “in an unrefined state.” The name of fino or manzanilla Sherries drawn from barrels in the
spring when the flor is thickest, then immediately bottled—usually unfined and without stabilization. En rama
Sherries are extremely fresh and vivid and last mere months because they are so fragile. The equivalent of
drinking Sherry directly from the cask, en rama Sherries are extremely rare on the commercial market.
EXTRA SECO: SPARKLING WINE that is not quite as dry as BRUT (SECO).


F
FLOR: Literally, “flower.” A layer of YEAST cells that forms naturally on top of manzanilla and fino Sherries as
they age in the cask. Flor acts to prevent OXIDATION and also contributes a unique flavor to the wine.


G
GRAN RESERVA: A BODEGA’S top wine, produced only in excellent years and then subject to lengthy
AGING. Though national law stipulates that red gran reservas must be aged two years in oak barrels, each
DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN or DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN CALIFICADA can set higher standards. In
Rioja, for example, red gran reservas must be aged for two years in barrel followed by three years in bottle,
and in practice, many Rioja producers exceed that.


L
LÁGRIMA: Literally, “tears.” Lágrima also refers to a wine made from free-run juice without any mechanical
pressing.


M
MÉTODO TRADICIONAL: Spanish term denoting SPARKLING WINE made by the Champagne method
(MÉTHODE CHAMPENOISE). CAVA, by law, must be made this way.


P
PAGO: Term commonly used for a single estate. In 2003, the government of Spain also gave the term a legal
definition and status, incorporating it into the official denominación system. Thus, in addition to Spain’s DOs,
(DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN) and DOCAs (DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN CALIFICADA) there exists the
status DO Pago. These are denominations of origin awarded to just a single estate considered exemplary.
So, for example, the estate Dominio de Valdepusa has its own DO Pago called Dominio de Valdepusa. Many
Spanish equate a DO Pago with a French Grand Cru. As of 2012, there were about ten DO Pago estates in
Spain.
PASADA: Term used to describe a well-aged Sherry.


R
RESERVA: A wine produced only in excellent years. Though national law stipulates that red reservas must be
aged for one year in oak barrels, each DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN or DENOMINACIÓN DE ORIGEN
CALIFICADA can set higher standards. Red reservas from Rioja, for example, must be aged for a minimum of
three years, one of which must be in barrel. Many Rioja producers nonetheless exceed these requirements.
ROBLE: Oak. Despite Spain’s proximity to France, many Spanish producers age their wines in American oak.
ROCIOS: Literally, “morning dew.” The name of the process of transferring Sherry between the CRIADERAS.
The name is a reflection of the gentleness with which the process is done.
ROSADO: Rosé. It’s still a well-kept secret that Spain makes some of the best rosés in Europe. The rosés
from Navarra are especially well regarded.


S
SECO: Dry.
SEMISECO: Medium dry.
SOBRETABLE: In Sherry production, the term for the period of time a new wine spends before it goes into the
SOLERA. The sobretable is usually six to eight months, but occassionally up to a year.
SOLERA: Complex network of barrels used for aging Sherry by progressively blending younger wines into
older wines. Since the barrels are not completely filled, the wine is allowed to be gently subjected to
OXIDIZATION during the process. Wine held in a solera is said to undergo the solera process.
V
VENDIMIA: Vintage.
VIEJO: Old.
VIÑA: Literally, “vineyard,” but the word viña is often used as part of a brand name as, for example, in Viña
Arana.
VINO DE MESA: Table wine.
VINO ESPUMOSO: General term for SPARKLING WINE.
VINO GENEROSO: FORTIFIED wine developed under FLOR.
PORTUGUESE WINE TERMS

B
BRANCO: Denotes a white wine.


C
COLHEITA: Literally, “harvest.” However, colheita is also the name for an aged tawny Port from a single
harvest. Colheita Ports are rare.
CUBA DE CALOR: A method of making fortified base wine for inexpensive Madeiras that involves heating the
base wine in large vats fitted with serpentine-shaped, stainless-steel heating coils very slowly over a period of
three to six months.


D
DENOMINAÇÃO DE ORIGEM CONTROLADA (DOC): See page 926.


E
ESCOLHA: Translated as “choice,” escolha is used on labels to denote special selection wines in Portugal.
ESTUFAGEM: The step in the process of making Madeira that involves heating the wine. Depending on the
quality of the Madeira being produced, there are several estufagem methods. The most basic involves placing
the FORTIFIED base wines in containers that are then heated to an average temperature of 113°F/45°C (with
a maximum temperature of 131°F/55°C allowed) for three to six months. To make the very finest Madeiras,
however, the containers may be placed in a warehouse attic, which builds up tremendous heat thanks to the
intense Madeiran sun. There, the Madeira-to-be may be left for twenty years or more.


G
GARRAFEIRA: Used in reference to Portuguese still wines, the word garrafeira indicates a wine of especially
high quality. But the word also means “wine cellar” or “bottle cellar” (from the Portuguese garrafa—“bottle”). In
addition, garrafeira is a style of Port, albeit a rare one. Rich and supple, garrafeira Ports are usually from a
single outstanding year and are aged briefly in wood and then for as many as twenty to forty years in large
glass bottles. After aging, the garrafeira is decanted and transferred into standard 25-ounce (750-milliliter)
bottles and sold.


L
LAGAR: A shallow stone or cement trough in which grapes are trodden by foot (usually for several hours) in
order to crush them and mix the skins with the juice. Treading grapes by foot, an ancient practice, is still
widely practiced in Portugal, and thus many wineries have lagares.


P
PIPE: A traditional Port barrel holding the equivalent of sixty cases of wine. Historically, Port was shipped by
the PIPE to importers who would then bottle it for sale to consumers.


Q
QUINTA: Literally, “farm.” In Portugal, the word quinta is used to refer both to a specific vineyard and to a
wine estate. Quinta do Noval, for example, is the name of a highly regarded wine estate in the Douro region.
Ports known as single-vintage quinta Ports come from grapes grown on a single estate in a single year.
T
TINTO: Denotes a red wine.
GERMAN AND AUSTRIAN WINE TERMS

A
ALTE REBEN: The term used in Germany and Austria for old vines.
AMTLICHE PRÜFUNGSNUMMER: A quality-control test number (the AP number) signifying that a wine has
passed official analytical and taste tests. It appears on every bottle of quality German wine in the category of
QUALITÄTSWEIN BESTIMMTER ANBAUGEBIETE (QBA) or QUALITÄTSWEIN MIT PRÄDIKAT (QMP).
ANBAUGEBIET: One of thirteen specified winegrowing regions in Germany. Plural: anbaugebiete.
AUSBRUCH: A category of wine made in Austria, in Burgenland. Ausbruche (the plural) are slightly more
opulent than BEERENAUSLESEN, and must be made from overripe, BOTRYTIZED and/or naturally
shriveled grapes.
AUSLESE: Plural: auslesen. Literally, “select harvest.” A level of full ripeness according to the traditional
German system. In the modern VDP system in Germany, denotes a wine with significant sweetness.


B
BEERENAUSLESE (BA): Plural: beerenauslesen. Literally, “berry select harvest.” A level of considerable
ripeness and sweetness in both the traditional and modern German systems. Beerenauslesen have often
been the product of at least some BOTRYTIZED grapes.
BEREICH: One of thirty-nine official districts. Germany’s thirteen wine regions (ANBAUGEBIETE) are
officially broken down into thirty-nine bereiche (the plural of bereich), which in turn are broken down into 167
GROSSLAGEN, which are broken down into approximately 2,658 EINZELLAGEN.
BERG: Hill or mountain.
BLAU: Blue; when used to describe grapes, it means red.
BOCKSBEUTEL: Flagon-shaped bottle used for the wines of Germany’s Franken region.
BURG: Fortress.
BUSCHENSCHENK: In the southern Austrian countryside, this is the name for a rustic restaurant that
elsewhere is called a HEURIGE. A buschenschenk is easily identified by the buschenschenk (also the name
for a swag of fir branches) tied to its doors.


D
DAC: Districtus Austriae Controllatus, or protected Austrian declaration of origin. Instituted in 2001, this
system organizes Austrian wine into regions with specific laws on which grapes are allowed to be grown and
other viticultural and winemaking regulations. It was modeled after France’s AOC system in an effort to
increase quality and put the focus on TERROIR.
DEUTSCHER WEIN: German table wine, the humblest category of wine. Although the ALCOHOL content,
acidity level, and origin of grapes are all controlled by law, Deutscher wein is usually so light, it’s often just a
step above water. The term Deutscher means “of Germany.” Absent that designation, the wine may be a
“Euroblend” based on grapes that may come from one of several other European Union countries.


E
EDELFÄULE: BOTRYTIS CINEREA; Germany’s and Austria’s luscious DESSERT WINES—
BEERENAUSLESEN and TROCKENBEERENAUSLESEN—are made with the help of edelfäule.
EINZELLAGE: The official name for an individual vineyard site. There are approximately 2,658 of them in
Germany. Germany’s thirteen wine regions are officially broken down into thirty-nine BEREICHE, which in
turn are broken down into 167 GROSSLAGEN, which are broken down into einzellagen, the plural of
einzellage.
EISWEIN: A rare and especially intense DESSERT WINE made by pressing frozen grapes that have been left
hanging on the vine into midwinter, sometimes February. (Eiswein carries the vintage date of the main harvest
year, so even if, for example, eiswein grapes were harvested in January 2015, the bottle would carry the
vintage date 2014.) When eiswein grapes are harvested in late winter, they are gently pressed while still
frozen so that the ice is separated from the remaining concentrated, very sweet, high-acid juice. Because of
their ACIDITY, eiswein are usually less unctuous but more vibrant than BEERENAUSLESEN or
TROCKENBEERENAUSLESEN. Eisweins age for decades and are extremely expensive.
ERSTE LAGE: Designation that indicates a first-class vineyard, similar to the designation Premier Cru in
Burgundy. The designation used by the 200 plus members of the VDP. The term Erste Lage generally
appears on the neck label. See description of the VDP system on page 553.
ERSTES GEWÄCHS: An old term meaning first growth. Used before 2006 in the Rheingau for high-quality
dry wines made from riesling and pinot noir. Today, used less frequently as producers adopt VDP terms
instead.
ERZEUGERABFÜLLUNG: Wines produced and bottled by a grower or a cooperative. You won’t see
erzeugerabfüllung on the labels of well-known estates.


F
FEDERSPIEL: A term used in the Wachau region of Lower Austria to indicate natural unchaptalized wines
with at least 11.5 but no more than 12.5 percent ALCOHOL.
FEINHERB: An unofficial term used in Germany as a synonym for halbtrocken or half-dry wines—defined as
less than 1.8 percent residual sugar. Wines called feinherb usually still taste extremely DRY because of the
high corresponding ACIDITY in German wines.
FLASCHE: Bottle—the English word flask is derived from flasche.


G
GROSSLAGE: One of approximately 167 collections of vineyards. Germany’s thirteen wine regions are
officially broken down into thirty-nine BEREICHE, which in turn are broken down into 167 grosslagen (the
plural of grosslage), which are broken down into approximately 2,658 EINZELLAGEN.
GROSSE LAGE: A term used by members of the VDP in Germany to indicate a vineyard that is of the highest
quality. The term roughly corresponds to the Burgundian term Grand Cru. The term Grosse Lage will appear
on the neck label. See description of the VDP system page 553.
GROSSES GEWÄCHS: The VDP term for a dry wine from a vineyard designated GROSSE LAGE, or of the
highest quality.
GUTSABFÜLLUNG: Estate bottled.
GUTSWEIN: A term used by members of the VDP to indicate the wine comes from a good- but not great-
quality vineyard owned by the winery. See description of the VDP system, page 553


H
HALBTROCKEN: Literally, “half-dry”—defined as less than 1.8 percent residual sugar. The term is used in
Germany, but rarely in Austria. Wines labeled halbtrocken usually still taste extremely DRY because of the
high corresponding ACIDITY in German wines. The term FEINHERB is often used as a synonym.
HEURIGE: In Austria, a rustic type of restaurant often attached to a winemaker’s home. Traditionally, all of the
food at a heurige is made from scratch by the winemaker and his family. Similarly, the wine offered (which is
also referred to as heurige) is the winemaker’s.


K
KABINETT: A level of ripeness indicating that the wine was not completely ripe according to the traditional
German system. Kabinett wines are drunk by Germans as every-night wines and their dependable presence
in the family’s kitchen or living room cabinet gave them their name. In the modern German system adopted by
members of the VDP, kabinett is a level of minor sweetness. The term was also once used in Austria to
indicate a table wine of modest ripeness, but ripeness designations now rarely appear on Austrian wines
unless the wines are sweet (i.e. AUSBRUCH, BEERENAUSLESEN, etc.).
KELLER: Cellar.
KMW: Acronym for Klosterneuburger Mostwage. In Austria, the KMW scale is used to measure sugar in
grapes and hence their ripeness. In Germany, sugar is measured in OECHSLE; in France, in BAUMÉ; and in
the United States, in BRIX.


L
LESE: Harvest. Harvest dates generally range from September to December, according to the variety of
grape, weather conditions, and the kind of wine being produced. One exception is EISWEIN, which can be
harvested in January of the year following the main harvest.
LIEBLICH: Semisweet. The term used to describe German wines with discernible sweetness. Lieblich wines,
therefore, are those that taste sweeter than HALBTROCKEN (half-dry). They can have up to 4.5 percent
residual sugar (45 grams per liter).


O
OECHSLE: Scale used in Germany to indicate the ripeness of grapes. Developed in the nineteenth century
by the physicist Ferdinand Oechsle, Oechsle measures the weight of the grape juice or MUST. Since the
contents of the must are primarily sugar and ACIDS, the must weight is an indication of ripeness. According
to traditional German law, ripeness categories are based on Oechsle levels that are specified for each grape
variety and wine region (meaning they can change region to region). For example, for a riesling wine in the
Mosel to be considered a SPÄTLESE, it must have 76 degrees Oechsle; in the Rheingau, a riesling must
have 85 degrees Oechsle to be a spätlese. These adjustable levels reflect the fact that in some very cold
regions like the Mosel, ripeness is harder to achieve.
ORTSWEIN: Designation that indicates the wine comes from a good but not great vineyard—roughly the
equivalent of a Burgundian village wine. The designation used by the 200-plus members of the VDP. See
description of the VDP system page 553.


P
PRÄDIKAT: The word roughly translates as “superior quality” or “possessing special attributes.” Prädikatswein
therefore is the general term for high-quality wine.
Q
QUALITÄTSWEIN BESTIMMTER ANBAUGEBIETE (QBA): A broad category of basic everyday wine under
German law. QbA wines must come from one of the official thirteen winegrowing regions (Anbaugebiete), and
the region must be shown on the label. QbA wines are made from grapes that have attained only a low level
of ripeness, though there must be at least enough sugar in the grapes to produce a wine with 7 percent
ALCOHOL BY VOLUME. CHAPTALIZATION (adding sugar to the unfermented grape juice to boost the body
and final alcohol level) is permitted and often used. QbA wines range from dry to semisweet.
QUALITÄTSWEIN MIT PRÄDIKAT (QMP): Translated as “quality wine with specific attributes,” this is the top
level of German wines. In the traditional German system, QmP wines prominently display a ripeness level on
the wine label (from KABINETT up to TROCKENBEERENAUSLESE) and a sweetness level, from dry
(TROCKEN) to extremely sweet. Unlike QbA wines, QmP wines may not be CHAPTALIZED. QmP wines
must be produced from allowed grape varieties in one of the 39 subregions (BEREICH) of one of the 13 wine-
rowing regions, although it is the region rather than the subregion that is mandatory information on the label.


R
ROTWEIN: Red wine; Germany and Austria are famous for their whites, but a good deal of red wine is made
in each and consumed locally.
S
SCHILCHER: Austrian name for a high-acid rosé made from the blauer wildbacher grape, which grows
almost exclusively in west Styria.
SCHLOSS: Castle—many German wine estates are housed in what were once medieval castles.
SEKT: SPARKLING WINE.
SMARAGD: Austrian term used in the Wachau region of Lower Austria for the ripest grapes and hence are
the fullest-bodied wines. Smaragd wines must have a minimum of 12.5 percent alcohol, but most have
considerably more. The word smaragd is also the name of a bright green lizard that suns itself in the Wachau
vineyards.
SPÄTLESE: Plural: spätlesen. Literally, “late harvest.” A level of ripeness indicating that the wine was just ripe
according to the traditional German system. According to this traditional system, a spatlese could be dry, half-
dry, or semisweet. In the distinctly different modern German system adopted by members of the VDP,
spätlese is a level of sweetness above KABINETT.
STEINFEDER: In the Wachau region of Lower Austria, natural unchaptalized wines with no more than 11.5
percent alcohol are referred to as steinfeders. These come from the least ripe grapes and hence are the
lightest bodied of Wachau wines.
STRAUSSWIRTSCHAFT: German wine pubs, often attached to growers’ homes, where they can sell their
own wines and light foods for a total of only four months of the year, so as not to take business away from full-
fledged restaurants open twelve months a year. A strauss—“wreath”—is usually hung over the door.
SÜSSRESERVE: Grape juice that has been held back from the harvest and unfermented so that it has all of
its natural sweetness. In Germany, small amounts of süssreserve may be added to some high-ACID wines in
order to BALANCE them.


T
TROCKEN: Dry. Wines labeled trocken from both Germany and Austria must have less than 0.9 percent
RESIDUAL SUGAR.
TROCKENBEERENAUSLESE: Plural: trockenbeerensauslesen, but usually referred to as TBA. Literally, “dry
berry select harvest”—an indication that the grapes had hung so long on the vine that they had shriveled
almost to raisins before being picked. TBA is the ripest and sweetest level of both German and Austrian wine.
The grapes for the wine are often BOTRYTIZED.


V
VDP: Verband Deutscher Prädikatsweingüter, or Association of German Prädikat Wine Estates. An
organization of some 200 prestigious estates throughout Germany that are revising the traditional concepts of
ripeness and sweetness in the country. The VDP has also instituted a Burgundian-like ranking system for
vineyards, from GROSSES LAGE (Grand Cru) down to GUTSWEIN (village wine).


W
WEINGUT: Wine estate.
WEINKELLEREI: Winery that buys grape MUST or wine from a grower, then bottles and markets the wine.
WEINSTUBE: German for “wine tavern;” a comfortable, casual restaurant where Germans go for simple food
and a bottle of wine.
WEISSHERBST: In Germany, a rosé wine of at least QUALITÄTSWEIN BESTIMMTER ANBAUGEBIETE
(QBA) status made from red grapes of a single variety. A specialty of Baden.
WINZER: Grape farmer.
HUNGARIAN WINE TERMS

A
ASZÚ: The term for shriveled grapes that have been attacked by the beneficial mold BOTRYTIS CINEREA.
More commonly, however, you’ll encounter aszú as part of the name of Hungary’s most famous wine: Tokaji
Aszú. Luscious and honeyed, Tokaji Aszú is to Hungary what Sauternes is to France—a renowned sweet
wine that is both difficult and expensive to make.


E
EDES: Slightly sweet, a term usually applied to Szamorodni, the type of wine made in Tokaj from vineyards
where the grapes have not been sufficiently affected by BOTRYTIS CINEREA to make Tokaji Aszú.
Szamorodni may be slightly sweet or dry (SZÁRAZ).


G
GÖNCI: The traditional barrels (named after the village of Gönc, known for its barrel makers) used in making
Tokaji Aszú. Gönci hold about 37 gallons (140 liters) of wine.


P
PRIMAE CLASSIS: Literally, “first class.” A Latin designation used by the Hungarians since around 1700 to
indicate a Tokaj vineyard of first-class stature. The Tokaji Aszú wines produced from grapes grown in such a
vineyard would by extension be considered top flight.
PRO MENSA CAESARIS PRIMUS: Around A.D. 1700, two Tokaj vineyards were given this designation,
which means chosen for the royal table. These vineyards, Csarfas and Mézes Mály, ranked above those
designated PRIMAE CLASSIS.
PUTTONY: The traditional basket in which ASZÚ grapes were gathered. The word puttony has given rise to
puttonyos, the manner by which the sweetness of Tokaji Aszú is measured. Tokaji Aszú wines are labeled
from two to six puttonyos; the more puttonyos, the sweeter the wine.


S
SECUNDO CLASSIS: “Second class” in Latin, first used in Hungary around 1700 to indicate a Tokaj vineyard
considered second-best. Hence, a Tokaji Aszú wine that is second in quality compared to wines made from
grapes grown in PRIMAE CLASSIS vineyards, but still well above most other vineyards.
SZÁRAZ: Dry. The term is usually applied to Szamorodni, the type of wine made in the Tokaj region from
vineyards where the grapes are not sufficiently affected by BOTRYTIS CINEREA to make Tokaji Aszú.
GREEK WINE TERMS

A
AMPHORA: An earthenware vessel used by the ancient Greeks and Romans to store and ship wine. An
amphora was oval in shape, with two large handles at the top for carrying, and a pointed bottom so that the
vessel could be pushed into the soft earth, where it would remain upright. Amphorae range in size from that of
a milk can to a refrigerator.
ARCHONDIKO: A word appearing on the labels of TOPIKOS OENOS, or PGI, wines. Archondiko roughly
translates as CHÂTEAU.


E
EPITRAPEZIOS OENOS (E.O.): The simplest category of Greek wine, equivalent to VIN DE TABLE, or
TABLE WINE, in France.


K
KRATER: A shallow bronze or pottery bowl used in antiquity to hold wine; wine would be poured from an
AMPHORA into a krater for serving.
KTIMA: Estate; can appear on the labels of TOPIKOS OENOS wines.
KYLIX: A shallow, two-handled, often beautifully decorated cup from which wine was drunk in antiquity.
KYTHOS: In antiquity, a ladle used to scoop wine from the KRATER and transfer it into a KYLIX.


M
MONASTIRI: Monastery; several Greek wine estates are located in former monasteries, and several Greek
monasteries still produce wine. The word monastiri sometimes appears on the labels of TOPIKOS OENOS
wines.


S
STEFÁNI: A way of training grapevines that is especially common on windswept Greek islands. The vines are
trained in a circle low to the ground (stefáni means “crown”), so that the grapes grow in the center, protected
from the wind.


T
TOPIKOS OENOS (T.O.): One of the simpler categories of Greek wine, equivalent to PGI in European Union
wine laws, or VIN DE PAYS, France’s country wine.
     THE CHÂTEAUX RANKED IN THE 1855 CLASSIFICATION OF
                       BORDEAUX

THE MÉDOC
In the Médoc, the 1855 classification was based on the reputation of the châteaux (not on the ground where
the vines grew) and did not take into account whether the châteaux produced red or white wines. In point of
fact, virtually all of the Médoc châteaux listed below make red wines exclusively.


FIRST GROWTHS (Premiers Crus)
CHÂTEAU HAUT-BRION (Pessac-Léognon, in Graves, not the Médoc)
CHÂTEAU LAFITE-ROTHSCHILD (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU LATOUR (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU MARGAUX (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU MOUTON-ROTHSCHILD (Pauillac)


SECOND GROWTHS (Deuxièmes Crus)
CHÂTEAU BRANE-CANTENAC (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU COS D’ESTOURNEL (St.-Estèphe)
CHÂTEAU DUCRU-BEAUCAILLOU (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU DURFORT-VIVENS (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU GRUAUD-LAROSE (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU LASCOMBES (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU LÉOVILLE-BARTON (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU LÉOVILLE-LAS CASES (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU LÉOVILLE-POYFERRÉ (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU MONTROSE (St.-Estèphe)
CHÂTEAU PICHON-LONGUEVILLE (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU PICHON-LONGUEVILLE, COMTESSE DE LALANDE (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU RAUZAN-GASSIES (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU RAUZAN-SÉGLA (Margaux)


THIRD GROWTHS (Troisièmes Crus)
CHÂTEAU BOYD-CANTENAC (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU CALON-SÉGUR (St.-Estèphe)
CHÂTEAU CANTENAC-BROWN (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU DESMIRAIL (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU D’ISSAN (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU FERRIÈRE (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU GISCOURS (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU KIRWAN (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU LAGRANGE (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU LA LAGUNE (Haut-Médoc)
CHÂTEAU LANGOA-BARTON (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU MALESCOT ST.-EXUPÉRY (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU MARQUIS D’ALESME (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU PALMER (Margaux)


FOURTH GROWTHS (Quatrièmes Crus)
CHÂTEAU BEYCHEVELLE (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU BRANAIRE-DUCRU (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU DUHART-MILON (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU LAFON-ROCHET (St.-Estèphe)
CHÂTEAU LA TOUR-CARNET (Haut-Médoc)
CHÂTEAU MARQUIS-DE-TERME (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU POUGET (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU PRIEURÉ-LICHINE (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU ST.-PIERRE (St.-Julien)
CHÂTEAU TALBOT (St.-Julien)


FIFTH GROWTHS (Cinquièmes Crus)
CHÂTEAU BATAILLEY (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU BELGRAVE (Haut-Médoc)
CHÂTEAU CANTEMERLE (Haut-Médoc)
CHÂTEAU CLERC-MILON (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU COS LABORY (St.-Estèphe)
CHÂTEAU CROIZET-BAGES (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU D’ARMAILHAC (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU DAUZAC (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU DE CAMENSAC (Haut-Médoc)
CHÂTEAU DU TERTRE (Margaux)
CHÂTEAU GRAND-PUY-DUCASSE (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU GRAND-PUY-LACOSTE (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU HAUT-BAGES-LIBÉRAL (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU HAUT-BATAILLEY (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU LYNCH-BAGES (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU LYNCH-MOUSSAS (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU PÉDESCLAUX (Pauillac)
CHÂTEAU PONTET-CANET (Pauillac)


SAUTERNES AND BARSAC (Also part of the 1855 Classification)
These châteaux in Sauternes and Barsac make mainly sweet white wines.
FIRST GREAT GROWTH (Premier Cru Supérieur)
CHÂTEAU D’YQUEM (Sauternes)


FIRST GROWTHS (Premiers Crus)
CHÂTEAU CLIMENS (Barsac) CHÂTEAU COUTET (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU DE RAYNE-VIGNEAU (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU GUIRAUD (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU LAFAURIE-PEYRAGUEY (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU LA TOUR BLANCHE (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU RABAUD-PROMIS (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU RIEUSSEC (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU SIGALAS-RABAUD (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU SUDUIRAUT (Sauternes)
CLOS HAUT-PEYRAGUEY (Sauternes)


SECOND GROWTHS (Deuxièmes Crus)**
CHÂTEAU BROUSTET (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU CAILLOU (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU D’ARCHE (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU DE MALLE (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU DE MYRAT (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU DOISY-DAËNE (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU DOISY-DUBROCA (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU DOISY-VÉDRINES (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU FILHOT (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU LAMOTHE (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU LAMOTHE-GUIGNARD (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU NAIRAC (Barsac)
CHÂTEAU ROMER (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU ROMER-DU-HAYOT (Sauternes)
CHÂTEAU SUAU (Barsac)
**When Sauternes and Barsac were classified in 1855, twelve Deuxièmes Crus Classés were designated.
Since then, some of these have split into more than one château. The Deuxièmes Crus Classés now number
fifteen.
                              THE DOCGS OF ITALY

ABRUZZI
MONTEPULCIANO D’ABRUZZO


APULIA
CASTEL DEL MONTE BOMBINO NERO
CASTEL DEL MONTE NERO DI TROIA RISERVA
CASTEL DEL MONTE ROSSO RISERVA
PRIMITIVO DI MANDURIA DOLCE NATURALE


BASILICATA
AGLIANICO DEL VULTURE SUPERIORE


CAMPANIA
AGLIANICO DEL TABURNO
FIANO DI AVELLINO
GRECO DI TUFO
TAURASI


EMILIA-ROMAGNA
ALBANA DI ROMAGNA
COLLI BOLOGNESI CLASSICO PIGNOLETTO


FRIULI-VENEZIA GIULIA
COLLI ORIENTALI DEL FRIULI PICOLIT
RAMANDOLO
ROSAZZO


LAZIO
CANNELLINO DI FRASCATI
CESANESE DEL PIGLIO
FRASCATI SUPERIORE


LOMBARDY
FRANCIACORTA
OLTREPÓ PAVESE METODO CLASSICO
SCANZO
SFORZATO DI VALTELLINA
VALTELLINA SUPERIORE


MARCHE
CASTELLI DI JESI VERDICCHIO RISERVA
CONERO
OFFIDA
VERDICCHIO DI MATELICA RISERVA
VERNACCIA DI SERRAPETRONA


PIEDMONT
ALTA LANGA
ASTI
BARBARESCO
BARBERA D’ASTI
BARBERA DEL MONFERRATO SUPERIORE
BAROLO
BRACHETTO D’ACQUI
DOLCETTO DI DIANO D’ALBA
DOLCETTO DI DOGLIANI
DOLCETTO DI OVADA SUPERIORE
ERBALUCE DI CALUSO
GATTINARA
GAVI
GHEMME
NIZZA
ROERO
RUCHÉ DI CASTAGNOLE MONFERRATO


SARDINIA
VERMENTINO DI GALLURA


SICILY
CERASUOLO DI VITTORIA


TUSCANY
BRUNELLO DI MONTALCINO
CARMIGNANO
CHIANTI
CHIANTI CLASSICO
ELBA ALEATICO PASSITO
MONTECUCCO SANGIOVESE
MORELLINO DI SCANSANO
SUVERETO
VAL DI CORNIA ROSSO
VERNACCIA DI SAN GIMIGNANO
VINO NOBILE DI MONTEPULCIANO


VENETO
AMARONE DELLA VALPOLICELLA
ASOLO PROSECCO
BAGNOLI FRIULARO
BARDOLINO SUPERIORE
COLLI DI CONEGLIANO
COLLI EUGANEI FIOR D’ARANCIO
CONEGLIANO VALDOBBIADENE-PROSECCO
LISON
MONTELLO
PIAVE MALANOTTE
RECIOTO DELLA VALPOLICELLA
RECIOTO DI GAMBELLARA
RECIOTO DI SOAVE
SOAVE SUPERIORE


UMBRIA
SAGRANTINO DI MONTEFALCO
TORGIANO ROSSO RISERVA
                                    INDEXES

THE WINES TO KNOW

                               A    ⃒B     ⃒C     ⃒D    ⃒E    ⃒F
                                G    ⃒H     ⃒I   ⃒J    ⃒K    ⃒L
                               M    ⃒N    ⃒O      ⃒P    ⃒Q    ⃒R
                               S    ⃒T    ⃒U     ⃒V    ⃒W     ⃒Z

A
Abadía Abadía Retuerta, 454
Adriano Adami, 360
Adegas Gran Vinum, 493
Adelsheim, 764
Agustí Torelló Mata, 481
Alana-Tokaj, 639
Bodegas Toro Albalá, 472
Lucien Albrecht, 290
Allegrini, 360, 361
Alma Negra, 891
Château Angélus, 171
Antinori, 398–99
Anwilka, 904–05
Archaval Ferrer, 891
Ata Rangi, 859
Au Bon Climat, 740
Aurélien Verdet, 224
B
Badia a Coltibuono, 397
Barbadillo, 471
Barboursville Vineyards, 797
Jim Barry, 844
Dr. Von Bassermann-Jordan, 583–84
Bastianich, 372, 373
Château de Beaucastel, 258, 259
Château Beaulieu, 311
Beaux Frères, 764
Bergström, 763
Gérard Bertrand, 303–04
Biondi-Santi, 400
Bollinger, 195
Bonneau du Martray, 224
Bonny Doon Vineyard, 730
Boutari, 663
Château Branaire-Ducru, 172
Brewer-Clifton, 740
David Bruce, 728
Bründlmayer, 607
Burrowing Owl, 821
C
Calera, 728, 729
Cap Rock, 790
Château Carbonnieux, 169
Château de la Cassemichère, 277
Catena Zapata, 889
Cave Spring, 817, 821
Domaine Cazes, 304
Cellers Ripoll Sans, 499
Ceretto, 348
Chambers Rosewood, 847
Channing Daughters Winery, 777
M. Chapoutier, 245
Domaine Jean-Louis Chave, 246
Chehalem, 763
Paul Cheneau, 480
Cheval des Andes, 890
Domaine de Chevalier, 169
A. Christmann, 584
Joh. Jos. Christoffel, 572
Chrysalis, 797
Cloudy Bay, 857
Colaneri, 817
Jean-Luc Colombo, 247
Comte Georges de Vogüé, 225
La Conseillante, 170
Giacomo Conterno, 348
Château Cos d’Estournel, 172
Conti Costanti, 399
Clos de la Coulée de Serrant, 277
Cousiño-Macul, 875
Craggy Range, 860
Yves Cuilleron, 245
Cune, 443
D
Louis-Benjamin Dagueneau, 276
René et Vincent Dauvissat, 222
Domaine Marcel Deiss, 290
Delille Cellars, 752
Demeter Zoltán, 637
Demorgenzon, 904
Diatom, 739
Dobogó, 640
Dolce, 704
Dow’s, 530
Driopi Estate, 663
Domaine Drouhin Oregon, 765
Dry River, 861
Domaine Dujac, 225
E
Neil Ellis, 903
Clos Erasmus, 500
Château d’Esclans, 310–11
Herdade do Esporão, 544
F
Failla, 713
Fairview, 903
Fall Creek, 790
Feiler-Artinger, 614
Fattoria di Fèlsina Berardenga, 397
Fillaboa, 494
Flying Fox, 798
La Follette, 720
Fontodi, 398
O. Fournier, 453
Fox Run, 778
Dr. Konstantin Frank, 777
G
Gaia Estate, 663
Gaja, 346, 347, 400
Gationois, 196
Gentilini, 660
Gere Attila, 638
Domaine Gerovassiliou, 660
Pierre Gimonnet et Fils, 194
Goldeneye, 721
González Byass, 471
W. & J. Graham’s, 528, 529
Alain Graillot, 246
La Granja Nuestra Señora de Remelluri, 442
Greywacke, 857, 860
Château de la Grille, 278
Grosset, 842
E. Guigal, 246
H
Fritz Haag, 572
Haak Vineyards & Winery, 788
Hamilton Russell Vineyards, 903
Hanzell, 712
Harlan Estate, 704
Hecht & Bannier, 303
J. Heinrich, 613
Henschke, 844
Hidalgo, 470
High Peaks, 661
Hirsch, 606
Domaine de l’Hortus, 303
Howling Bluff, 820
Huguet, 480
I
Inniskillin, 821
J
Paul Jaboulet Aîné, 247
Jean-Paul Brun, 234
Jermann, 373
Jonata, 742
K
K Vintners, 751
Karanika, 659
Karp-Schreiber, 570
Kilikanoon, 846
King Family, 798
Domaine Királyudvar, 638
Kir-Yianni, 661, 662
Klein Constantia, 905
Kongsgaard, 702
Krug, 195
Ktima Biblia Chora, 660–61
Kuentz-Bas, 291
Kumeu River, 859
Künstler, 577
L
Lafon, 223
Langtry, 721
Marcel Lapierre, 233
Domaine Laporte, 222, 276
Lapostolle, 875, 876
J. Lassalle, 193
As Laxas, 493
Leeuwin Estate, 843
Domaine Leflaive, 223
Joseph Leitz, 578
Leonetti Cellar, 752
Château Léoville-Poyferré, 172
Linden, 797
Liquidity, 819
Llano Estacado, 789
Loimer, 607
Long Shadows, 752
Dr. Loosen, 570, 750
R. López de Heredia, 442, 444
Emilio Lustau, 471
M
Maculan, 362
Malivoire, 820
Marcarini, 346
Mas de Daumas Gassac, 302
Mas de la Dame, 310
Mas Igneus, 500
Masi, 362
Charles Melton, 845
Melville, 739
Domaine Mercouri, 662
Le Clos de la Meslerie, 277
Messmer, 582–83
Meyer Family, 819
Peter Michael Winery, 712
Millbrook, 778
Milz-Laurentiushof, 571
Theo Minges, 583, 584
Lusco do Mino, 492
Château La Mission Haut-Brion, 170
Mission Hill Family Estate, 818
Robert Mondavi, 701
Montes, 877
Montevertine, 398
Chateau Morrisette, 796
Moschioni, 374
Mud House, 858
Muga, 443
Eugen Müller, 582
Müller-Catoir, 583
Mullineux, 904, 905
N
Navarro Vineyards, 720, 722
Château la Nerthe, 259
Neyen, 876
Niepoort, 529
Nieto Senetiner, 890
Nigl, 607
O
Ojai Vineyard, 742
1 + 1 = 3, 480
Oremus, 639
Osborne, 472
O’Shaughnessy, 703
Domaine Ostertag, 290
Ovid, 702–03
P
Château Pajzos, 640
Palacios, 499
Domaine les Pallières, 260
Paumanok, 779
Pazo San Mauro, 493
Pazo Serantellos, 492
Pedernales, 788
Domaine Pellé, 275
Penfolds, 846
Penner-Ash, 763
Pérez Pascuas, 454
Perpetua, 818
Domaine de la Perrière, 278
Alejandro Fernández Pesquera, 453
Pierre Peters, 193
Les Petits Grains, 304
Pewsey Vale, 843
Phillips Hill, 721
Château de Pibarnon, 312
Château Pichon-Longueville Comtesse de Lalande, 171
Dominio de Pingus, 453
Pio Cesare, 347
Dominique Piron, 233
Poet’s Leap, 750
Pol Roger, 194
Poliziano, 399
Ponzi, 764
Prats & Symington, 544
Prieler, 613
Domaines Prieur Pierre et Fils, 276
Q
Quinta das Arcas, 543
Quinta de Covela, 543
Quinta do Infantado, 529
Quinta do Vallado, 545
Quinta do Vesuvio, 530, 545
R
Radio-Coteau, 714
A. Rafanelli, 714
Domaine Ramonet, 223
Ramos Pinto, 528
Red Caboose, 789
Reichsgraf von Kesselstatt, 569
Renacer, 889
Reuscher-Haart, 570
Ridge, 715, 730
Domaine Rimbert, 302–03
La Rioja Alta, 443
Domaine Daniel Rion & Fils, 225
ROAR, 729
Matthias et Emile Roblin, 275
Clos de la Roche, 226
Rochioli, 714
Roda, 444
Louis Roederer, 196
Roederer Estates, 720
Rene Rostaing, 247
Royal Tokaji Wine Company, 640
Ruinart, 194
S
Château de Saint Cosme, 258
Salneval, 492
Luciano Sandrone, 348
Sanford, 741
Domaine le Sang des Cailloux, 260
Sattler, 612
Scala Dei, 500
Scarecrow, 703
Willi Schaefer, 571
Schiopetto, 372
Schloss Gobelsburg, 606, 608
Schloss Reinhartshausen, 578
Domaines Schlumberger, 292
Schramsberg Vineyards, 700
Heidi Schröck, 614
Scribe, 712
Segura Viudas, 481
Selbach-Oster, 569
Williams Selyem, 713
Seppeltsfield, 847
Shafer, 702
Sheldrake Point, 780
Shinn Estate, 779
Siduri, 741
Silver Oak, 715
Soter, 765
Sparkman, 751
Spreitzer, 577
Chateau St. Jean, 715
Standing Stone, 780
Chateau Ste. Michelle, 750
Steele, 722
Stoller, 766
Stony Hill, 700
Stratus, 820
Julien Sunier, 233
Szöke Mátyás, 637
T
Taittinger, 195
Tantalus, 818
Clos de Tart, 226
Taylor Fladgate, 528, 530
Domaine Tempier, 311
Terranoble, 877
Terrazas de los Andes, 889, 890
Michel Tête, 234
Tomero, 891
Torbreck, 845
Domaine de Trévallon, 312
Trimbach, 292
Trump, 796
Tselepos, 659
Tyrrell’s, 842
U
Umathum, 612
V
Valdespino, 470
Vega-Sicilia, 454
Vertice, 877
Vie di Romans, 374
Vietti, 346, 347
Domaine du Vieux Télégraphe, 259
Villa Maria, 858
Villa Russiz, 373
Vineyard 29, 701
Reichsrat von Buhl, 582
Domaine de la Voûte des Crozes, 234
W
Domäne Wachau, 608
Wairau River, 858
Robert Weil, 578
Domaine Weinbach, 291, 292
Hermann J. Wiemer, 778
Wild Earth, 861
Wild Goose, 819
Woodward Canyon, 751
Ken Wright, 765
Z
Zenato, 361
Domaine Zind Humbrecht, 291
GENERAL INDEX

Page numbers in bold refer to grape profiles and descriptions.
                                   A     ⃒B    ⃒C     ⃒D    ⃒E    ⃒F
                                    G     ⃒H    ⃒I   ⃒J    ⃒K    ⃒L
                                   M    ⃒N     ⃒O     ⃒P    ⃒Q    ⃒R
                                S ⃒T    ⃒U     ⃒V    ⃒W     ⃒X    ⃒Y ⃒Z

A
Able Clone, 855
Aborigines, 838
Abram, David, 103
Abruzzi, 412–13, 967
Abstinence, 665, 668–69
  see also Prohibition; Temperance movement
Acetic acid, 112–13, 117, 408
Acid
  as preservative, 127
  role of, 11–12
Aconcagua, 869
Adelaide Hills, 836–37
Aegean Islands, 23
Aerating, 132–33
Age ingrat, 128
Aging
  acid and, 11
  of Armagnac, 317
  of Barbaresco, 337–38
  of Barolo, 337–38
  brunello di Montalcino and, 388
  cava and, 477–78
  Chianti Classico Riservas and, 387
  of Cognac, 320–21
  factors affecting, 127
 Madeira and, 534
 nebbiolo and, 336–38
 overview of, 125–26
 process for, 41–42, 43
 Ribera del Duero and, 451–52
 Rioja and, 435–36, 438
 tannin and, 12
 Unico and, 451
Agiorgitiko, 76, 651, 654
Aglianico, 76, 414–15
Aglianico del Vulture, 417
Ahr, Germany, 586
Ah-So, 131
Aidani, 76
Airén, 53, 76, 432, 505
Alban Vineyards, 733
Albana, 76
Albana di Romagna, 330, 409, 410
Albariño, 54, 432, 486–87, 489, 490, 491, 677, 678
Albariza, 457
Albarola, 407
Albarossa, 76
Albillo mayor, 73, 449
Alcohol
 body and, 106, 108
 percentage of, 40
 role of, 10
Aleatico, 76
Alentejo, 513, 542
Alexander Valley, 709–710
Alfrocheiro preto, 76, 538, 542
Alicante bouschet, 76
Aligoté, 77, 204, 217
Allen, Herbert, 131
Alluvial soil, 24
Almeida, Armondo, 517
Alsace
  Crémant d’Alsace, 281–82
  foods of, 288–89
  gewürztraminer from, 60
  Grand Cru, 282–84
  grapes and wines of, 284–88
  land and vineyards of, 282
  most important wines of, 282
  overview of, 279–281
  pinot gris from, 65
  quick sip on, 280
  types of wine from, 281
  visiting, 288
  wines to know from, 290–92
Alta expresión, 434
Alvarinho, 77, 538, 540
Alvear, 459
Amaral, 538
Amarone, 351, 356–58
American Viticultural Areas (AVAs), 672
Amigne, 620
Amontillado, 119, 129, 461, 462
Ampelography, 55
Amphorae, 141, 649
Amyndeon, 647
Anatolia, 26
Ancestor vine, 831
Anderson, Burton, 324
Anderson Valley, 719
Andes, 867
Anjou, 269–270
Anselmi, 355–56
Ansonica, 77
Anthocyanins, 55, 114
Antinori, 411
Antinori, Piero, 329–330, 383
Antonini, Alberto, 888
Apalta, 872
Apera, 825
Apertifs, 160
Appassimento, 350, 355, 356–58
Appellation d’Origine Contrôlée (AOC), 137, 142, 297
Apulia, 413–14, 415–17, 967
Aragon, 60
Aragonez, 77, 538, 542
Arbois, 263
Archarnes, 647
Argentina
 grapes of, 884
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 882–88
 malbec and, 62
 map of, 878
 Mendoza, 887–88
 most important wines of, 882
 overview of, 879–882
 quick sip on, 881
 Salta, 888
 visiting, 887
 wine laws in, 929
 wines to know from, 889–891
Arinto, 77, 538, 540
Arizona, 800
Armagnac, 141, 313–18, 319
Armagnac-Ténarèze, 315–16
Armazém de calor, 533–34
Arneis, 77, 333, 334, 342
Aroma
  assessing, 102–06
  foul, 112–13
Arroyo Grande, 733
Artichokes, 117
Asia
  China, 908–916
  India, 921–22
  Japan, 917–920
  map of, 906
  overview of, 907
Asimov, Eric, 439
Asparagus, 112, 117, 286, 289, 441, 561–62
Asprinio, 77
Assemblage, 183, 189
Associated Vintners, 745
Assyrtiko, 77, 651, 655
Asti, 331, 332, 333, 335, 343–44
Atacama, 869
Athiri, 77
Auckland, 853–54
Auctions, 901, 909
Auler, Ed, 782
Ausbruch, 129, 597, 609
Auslese, 554
Ausonius, 549
Australia
 grapes of, 828–29
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 827–835
 map of, 822
 most important wines of, 825
 New South Wales, 838–39
 overview of, 823–25
 philosophies of winemaking and, 826–27
 quick sip on, 824
 sémillon from, 70
 South Australia, 836–38
 stickies and, 835–36
 syrah from, 71–72
 Tasmania, 839
 Victoria, 839–840
 Western Australia, 840–41
 wine laws in, 928
 wine regions of, 836–841
 wines to know from, 842–47
Austria
 botrytized wine from, 574
 Burgenland, 609–614
 compared to Germany, 592
 DAC and, 598–99
 foods of, 599–602
 grapes of, 594
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 592–93, 595–97
 Lower, 603–08
 map of, 590
 most important wines of, 595
 overview of, 591–92
 quick sip on, 593
    ripeness levels for, 597–98
    Styria, 615–16
    sweetness and ripeness and, 597–98
    Vienna, 617–18
    wine laws in, 926–27
Austrian wine terms, 960–64
Autolysis, 185
Auxerrois, 77
Avesso, 538, 540
Avvinare i bicchieri, 134
AXA, 631
Azal tinto, 77, 538
Azuma, Makoto, 176
B
Bacalhau, 527
Bacchus, 587
Baco blanc, 77, 316
Baco noir, 77, 769, 770, 811
Baden, Germany, 586–87
Badischer Winzerkeller, 587
Baga, 77, 538, 542
Baijiu, 909
Bairrada, 513, 542
Baja Peninsula, 805–06
Balance, 5–6
Balche, 783
Baldy, Marian W., 104
Ballard Canyon, 735, 737
Balsamic vinegar, 408
Balthazar, 187
Banana aroma, 112
Band-Aid aroma, 112
Bandol, 307
Banfi, 389–390
Banholzer, Carl, 803
Banyuls, 129, 299
Barbaresco, 64, 330, 333, 335–38
Barbera
  in Argentina, 884
  in California, 677, 680
  description of, 54
  in Piedmont, 333, 334, 335, 339, 341
Bardolino, 351, 358–59
Barnyard aromas, 112
Barolo, 64, 134, 330, 333, 335–38
Barossa Old Vine Charter, 831
Barossa Valley, 838
Barrel aging
  bottle aging and, 43
  in Burgundy, 205
  effect of, 48
  process of, 42, 50–51
  Rioja and, 436
  Sherry and, 459, 460
  Spanish wines and, 431
  Super Tuscans and, 384–85
Barrel alternative, 49
Barrel fermentation, 44, 51, 205
Barrel-making, 46–47
Barry, Edward, 138
Barry, Peter, 117
Barsac, 129, 147, 149, 150, 157–161, 969
Bartholdi, Frédéric-Auguste, 279
Bartoshuk, Linda, 109
Bas Armagnac, 315, 316
Basalt, 24
Basilicata, 413–14, 417, 967
Basque region, 501–02
Bastardo, 78, 538, 542
Batič, 425–26
Baxevanis, John J., 70
Beaucastel, Château de, 252, 732
Beaujolais (wine and region)
  Burgundy and, 208
  categories of, 229–231
  chilling, 232
  commercial vs. old style, 229
  dolcetto compared to, 341
  grapes for, 59
  grapes of, 229
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 231
  making of, 43
  map of, 227
  overview of, 227–28
  quick sip on, 228
  visiting, 231
  wines to know from, 233–34
Beaujolais Cru, 229, 230–31
Beaujolais Nouveau, 227, 231–32
Beaujolais-Villages, 229, 230
Beaumes-de-Venise, 255
Beckstoffer, Andy, 690
Beef, 219, 394, 469, 886
Beer, 561
Beerenauslese (BA), 67, 129, 548, 554–55, 597
Behar, Henry, 541
Beijing, 913
Belle Terre Vineyard, 693
Bellini, 350, 351, 359
Benedictines, 138, 199, 201, 203, 484
Benziger Family Winery, 710
Bergvliet, 895
Beringer, 693
Berlucchi, 405
Ch. W. Bernhard, 589
Berrouet, Jean-Claude, 144
Bianco di Custoza, 351
Bien Nacido, 735
Bierzo, 502, 504
Bin numbers, 827
Biodynamic farming, 34, 267, 710
Biondi Santi, Ferruccio, 389
Biondi-Santi, 388–89
Blachon, Roger, 242
Black muscat, 678, 694
Bladder press, 44
Blanc de blancs, 178, 188–89, 693
Blanc de noirs, 189, 693
Blanc du bois, 78, 784, 785, 788
Blanquette de Limoux, 298
Blauburgunder, 78, 559, 594, 619
Blauer portugieser, 78, 550, 551
Blauer wildbacher, 616
Blaufränkisch, 78, 593, 594, 595, 596, 611
Blending
  Champagne and, 174, 175, 183, 184, 185
  in southern Rhône, 250
Blends
 Bordeaux-style, 677, 685, 697, 813, 851
 overview of, 5
 Rhône, 677
 with zinfandel, 689–690
Blue Nun, 559
Boal, 533
Bobal, 78
Body weight, 106, 108
Boeuf bourguignon, 219
Bolgheri, 382
Bollinger, 192
Bologna, Giacomo, 339
Bonarda, 78, 334, 882, 884
Bonnezeaux, 269
Bonny Doon Vineyard, 725
Bootlegging, 669
Booze/bouse, as term, 122
Bordeaux (wine and region)
 aging of, 155
 appellations of, 147
 Barsac, 157–161
 botrytized wine from, 574
 China and, 909, 910
 classifications and, 149–153
 climate of, 140–41
 decanting, 133–34
 1855 classification of, 965–67
 export of, 141
 foods of, 167–68
 grapes of, 145
 Graves, 155–57
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 144–49
  major regions of, 148–49
  malbec and, 61
  map of, 143
  Médoc, 153–55
  merlot and, 63
  most important wines of, 147
  other regions of, 163–67
  overview of, 143–44
  Pomerol, 162–63
  quick sip on, 144
  Rioja compared to, 438
  Sauternes, 157–161
  sauvignon blanc in, 69
  sémillon in, 70
  St.-Émilion, 161–62
  visiting, 165
  wines to know from, 170–72
Bordeaux-style blends, 677, 685, 697, 813, 851
Bosco, 407
Botas, 459, 460
Botrytis cinerea
  ausbruch and, 609, 610
  cheese and, 253
  eiswein and, 555, 561
  in Hungary, 574
  in New York, 772
  Quarts de Chaume and, 269
  Sauternes and, 157–160
  sélection de grains nobles (SGN) and, 281, 287–88
  sémillon and, 70
  sugar content and, 52
  Tokaji Aszúj and, 631–33
  Torcolato and, 351
  trockenbeerenauslesen (TBA) and, 555
  Vouvray and, 272
Botrytized wine, 129, 693
Bottle (reductive) aging, 43
Bottles
  Champagne and, 174–75, 176, 185, 187
  Chianti and, 380
  developments in, 355
  Madeira and, 534
  Port and, 527
  sizes of, 187
Bottling, 43
Bouillabaisse, 306
Bouquet, 106
Bourboulenc, 78, 238, 296, 307
Bourgogne Blanc, 202
Bourgogne Rouge, 202
Bourgueil, 270–72
Boursiquot, Jean-Michel, 874
Brachetto, 78, 343
Brandy
  Germain-Robin, 716, 719
  grappa, 328
  from Jerez, 468
  Madeira and, 533
  pear, 762
  from South Africa, 900
  see also Armagnac; Cognac; Port
Braquet, 307
Brazil, 870
Bread, 395–96, 405, 478, 560–61, 600
Breathing, 132–33
Brettanomyces, 112
Brewer, Greg, 738
Brouilly, 230
David Bruce Winery, 724, 725
Brunello di Montalcino, 68, 330, 377, 387–390
Brunet, Georges, 309
Brut, 177, 182
Brut nature, 182
Brut wine, 177
Bual, 78, 533, 534, 535
Buena Vista, 670, 708
Burgenland
 DAC and, 599
 map of, 609
 overview of, 609–611
 sweet wines from, 598
 wines to know from, 612–14
Burgundian methods, 205
Burgundy (wine and region)
 aerating and, 133
 aging and, 219
 buying, 219–220
 Chablis, 200, 202, 208, 212–13
 chardonnay in, 58
 China and, 909, 910
 climate of, 140
 Côte Chalonnaise, 200, 202, 208, 216–17
 Côte d’Or, 200, 202, 208, 213–16
 foods of, 219, 220–21
 gamay noir in, 59
 Grand Cru vineyards of, 209
 grapes of, 204, 204
 history of, 198–99, 201
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 208–212
 Mâconnais, 200, 202, 208, 218–19
 map of, 197
 minerality of, 107
 overview of, 197–98
 pairing with food, 117, 118
 Piedmont compared to, 331
 pinot noir in, 67
 quick sip on, 198
 serving, 214
 terroir and, 201
 understanding of, 201–07
 villages of, 200, 204
 vintages and, 220
 visiting, 213
 white, 202, 215
 wines to know from, 222–26
Burning match aroma, 112
Busby, James, 833, 850
Bush, George H. W., 104
Buying wine, 121–24
C
Cabernet franc
 in Bordeaux, 145, 146–47
 in California, 677, 680
 in Canada, 811, 813
 in China, 912
 description of, 54–56
 in Friuli, 366, 367
 in Hungary, 627
 in Loire, 263, 268, 271
 in New York State, 769, 770, 772
 rosé from, 270
 in South Africa, 898
 in Texas, 784
 in Virginia, 794, 795
 in Washington State, 745, 748
Cabernet gernischt, 912
Cabernet sauvignon
 in Argentina, 882, 884
 in Australia, 824, 825, 829, 832–33, 838
 in Austria, 594
 in Bolgheri, 382
 in Bordeaux, 145, 146–47
 in California, 674, 677, 680, 685–86
 in Canada, 811
 Carmignano and, 392
 Chianti Classico and, 386–87
 in Chile, 866, 869, 872–73
 in China, 912
 chocolate and, 57
 decanting, 133–34
 description of, 56–57
 in Friuli, 366, 367, 370
 in Greece, 653
 in Hungary, 627, 628
 in Italy, 326–27
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
 in Loire, 263
 in Napa Valley, 697
 in New York State, 769, 770
 in New Zealand, 851, 852
 in Oregon, 759
 pairing with food, 120
 in Penedès, 475, 476
 in Priorat, 498
 in Provence, 307, 309
 in Ribera del Duero, 449
 rosé from, 270
 Sassicaia and, 330
 in South Africa, 896, 898, 901
 Super Tuscans and, 381
 in Texas, 784, 785
 Torres and, 482
 in Tuscany, 378, 379
 in Uruguay, 888
 in Veneto, 351, 352
 in Virginia, 794, 795
 in Washington State, 743–44, 745, 748
Cahors, 62, 885, 887
Calabrese di Montenuovo, 68, 376
Calabria, 413–14, 417
Calatayud, 504
Calcareous soil, 24
Calera Wine Company, 727
California
 Central Valley of, 676
 grapes of, 678, 680–81
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 679–694
 Livermore Valley, 731–32
 map of, 673
 Mendocino, 716–722
 most important wines of, 677
 Napa Valley, 695–704
  North Central Hills, 724–730
  number of vineyards in, 670
  overview of, 673–74
  Paso Robles, 732–34
  quick sip on, 674
  Sierra Foothills, 723
  Sonoma County, 706–715
  South Central Coast, 735–742
  wine industry growth in, 674–79
  York Mountain, 732–34
Calistoga, 18
Calitor, 79, 238, 307
Calmont, 566
Calorie content, 120
Calvados, 315
Campania, 413–15, 967
Campo de Borja, 60, 504
Campo Eliseo, 507
Canaanite jars, 649
Canada
  grapes of, 811
  icewine and, 815–16
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 810–15
  map of, 808
  most important wines of, 813
  overview of, 809–810
  quick sip on, 810
  visiting, 815
  wine laws in, 928
  wines to know from, 817–821
Canaiolo, 79, 378, 381, 386
Canelés, 167
Canned asparagus aroma, 112
Cannonau, 61, 79, 422
Canon-Fronsac, 147, 165
Canteiro, 534
Canterbury, 854
Cantina Tollo, 413
Cap Classique, 901
Cape of Good Hope, 897
Cape riesling, 79, 898
Capsaicin, 117
Carbon dioxide, 10
Carbonic maceration, 43, 228
Cardinal, 79
Carignan, 61, 79, 238, 296, 307
Carignane, 677, 680
Carignano, 422
Cariñena, 475, 476, 496, 498
Carmel Valley, 726, 727
Carmenère
  in Bordeaux, 145, 146–47
  in Chile, 864, 866, 869, 872, 873–74
  in China, 912
  description of, 79
Carmignano, 377, 379, 392–93
Carneros, 18, 705
Carneros, Domaine, 705
Carr, Billy, 783
Carricante, 79, 419
Casa de Piedra, 806
Casa Lapostolle, 63
Casa Madero, 805
Casablanca (Chile), 868
Casal Bordino, 413
Casal Thaulero, 413
Cases, 123
Cassis, 309
Castel del Monte, 416
Castiglioncello, 382
Castilla La Mancha, 63, 505
Catarratto bianco, 79
Catawba, 79, 769, 770
Catena, Ernesto, 883
Catena, Nicolás, 880
Catena Zapata, 880
Cava, 474, 476–481
Caves Taillevent, Les, 127
Cayuga, 79, 769, 770
Cellars de Scala Dei, 495–96
Centenarian vine, 831
Central Otago, 854, 856
Cephalonia, 647
Ceretto, 334
Cereza, 881, 882, 884
Chablis, 58, 107, 200, 202, 208, 212–13
Chai, 148
Chalk, 24, 179–180
Chalone (AVA), 726, 727
Chalone Vineyard, 727
Chambourcin, 79, 794, 795
Chamisal Vineyards, 733
Champagne (wine and region)
 bubbles in, 174, 176, 187–88
 California sparkling wines compared to, 690–92
 cava and, 476, 478, 479
  chardonnay in, 58
  climate of, 140
  description of, 174
  glassware and, 191–92, 354–55
  grapes of, 178
  grower, 191
  history of, 173–77
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 177–181
  making, 181–86
  nonvintage, 184
  pairing with food, 118
  pinot noir in, 66
  prestige cuvée, 184, 192
  quick sip on, 174
  serving, 129, 189–192
  sweetness of, 177, 182
  types of, 188–89
  vintage, 184
  visiting, 190
  wines to know from, 193–96
Chandon, Domaine, 692
Chandon Australia, Domaine, 832
Chantilli, 922
Chapoutier, M., 240, 243
Chaptal, Jean-Antoine, 52
Chaptalization, 52, 211
Charbono, 79–80
Chardonnay, pairing with food, 117–18
Chardonnay
  in Alsace, 285
  in Argentina, 882, 884
  in Australia, 824, 825, 828, 830–31
in Austria, 594, 605, 610, 611, 615–16
in Burgundy, 198, 202, 204, 210, 211–12
in California, 674, 677, 678, 680, 681–83
in Canada, 811, 813
in Carneros, 705
for cava, 476, 478
Champagne and, 178, 179–180, 188
in Chile, 866, 869, 872, 873
in China, 912
description of, 57–58
in Edna Valley, 733
Franciacorta and, 405
in Friuli, 366, 367, 369
in Hungary, 626, 628
in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
in Loire, 263
in New York State, 769, 770
in New Zealand, 851, 852
in Oregon, 754–55, 759, 761–62
in Penedès, 475
in Portugal, 540
in Provence, 307
in Rioja, 437
in Sonoma County, 710
in South Africa, 896, 898, 900–01
in South Central Coast, 737
in Texas, 784, 785
in Trentino-Alto Adige, 402–03
in Tuscany, 377, 378, 379–380
in Uruguay, 888
in Veneto, 351, 352
in Virginia, 794, 795
 viticulture and, 29
 in Washington State, 745, 748
 Wente and, 731
Chardonnay (village), 212
Charmat (tank) method, 343, 356
Charta, 576
Chasselas, 80, 620, 621
Château (term), 148
Chateau Rongzi, 914
Château-Grillet, 73, 236, 239, 240–42
Châteauneuf-du-Pape, 60, 63, 71, 107, 118, 235, 236, 248, 249, 251–54
Chave, Jean-Louis, 243
Cheese, 253, 265, 356, 523
Chehalem Mountains, 758
Chen, Jack, 675
Chénas, 230
Chêne Marchand, 265
Chenin blanc
 in California, 678
 in China, 912
 description of, 58–59
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
 in Loire, 262, 263, 268, 272
 in South Africa, 896, 898, 900
 in Texas, 784, 785
 in Washington State, 748
Cheval Blanc, Château, 54, 162
Chianti, 118, 377, 380, 382–85
Chianti Classico, 68, 133, 377, 380, 385–87
Chianti Classico 2000 project, 379
Chianti Classico Riservas, 387
Chianti Rufina, 385
Chiaretto, 359
Chile
  Argentina and, 879–880
  grapes of, 866
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 869, 871–74
  map of, 862
  merlot and, 63
  most important wines of, 869
  overview of, 863–68
  quick sip on, 864
  visiting, 872
  wine laws in, 929
  wines to know from, 875–77
Chiles, 117
China
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 911–16
  name of, 909
  overview of, 908–911
  translation issues and, 910
Chinese Exclusion Act, 675
Chinon, 270–72
Chiroubles, 230, 231
Chocolate, 57, 523, 621
Chocolate-covered Sauternes raisins, 159
Choreography, 7–8
Churchill, Winston, 173
Ciliegiolo, 68, 80, 376, 411
Cinqueterre, 407
Cinsaut, 80, 238, 255, 296, 307, 898
Cirò, 417
Citic Group, 910–11, 913
Citra, 413
Clairette, 80, 238, 296, 307
Clairette rose, 238
Clare Valley, 133, 837
Claret, 146
Clarity, 114
Clary, Château de, 254
Clay, 24
Clear Creek Distillery, 762
Climat, 202
Climate, 17–21, 46
Climate change, 20
Clinet, Château, 630–31
Clinton, Bill, 671
Clones, 30–32, 758, 761–62, 855
Cloudy Bay, 849
Clounoise, 238
Coale, Ansley, 716
Coastal Region (South Africa), 894–95, 896, 899, 901
Coda di volpe, 415
Códega, 514
Codorníu, 474, 476, 482
Coffeehouses, 596
Cognac, 141, 318–321
Colchagua Valley, 871–72
Cold soak, 39
Cold stabilization, 48
Colheita Madeira, 536
Colli Aretini, 385
Colli Fiorentini, 385
Colli Senesi, 385
Colline Pisane, 385
Colombard, 147
 see also French colombard
Color, confirming, 114
Colorado, 804
Colorino, 378, 386
Columbia Crest, 746
Columbia Valley, 744, 748–49
Columbia Winery, 745
Communes, 139
Complexity, 6–7
Concannon, 731
Concannon, James, 685, 731
Concha y Toro, 867, 872
Concord, 80, 770, 775
Condrieu, 73, 74, 236, 239, 240–42
Connectedness, 8
Consejo Regulador, 456, 465, 497
Constantia, 895
Cook, James, 850
Cool Climate Oenology and Viticulture Institute, 811
Coonawarra, 837–38
Coppola, Francis Ford, 695
Coquimbo, 869
Corbières, 300
Corked wine, 113, 133
Corks, 127, 132–33
Corkscrews, 130–32
Cornalin, 80
Cornas, 71, 241, 244
Cornelissen, Frank, 419
Cortese, 80, 334, 342
Corvina, 80
Corvina Veronese, 352, 353
Cos d’Estournel, 155
Cot/Côt (malbec), 61–62, 80, 263, 296, 885, 887
 see also Malbec
Côte Chalonnaise, 200, 202, 208, 216–17
Côte de Beaune, 208, 213–15
Côte de Brouilly, 230
Côte de Nuits, 208, 213–15
Côte de Sézanne, 180
Côte des Bar, 181
Côte des Blancs, 180–81, 189
Côte d’Or, 200, 202, 206, 208, 213–16
Coteaux d’Aix-en-Provence, 308–09
Coteaux d’Aubance, 269
Coteaux du Layon, 129, 269
Côte-Rôtie, 71, 73, 235, 236, 239, 241
Côtes, the, 165–67
Côtes de Bordeaux, 147, 165–67
Côtes de Bourg, 147
Côtes de Castillon, 147
Côtes de Francs, 147
Côtes de Provence, 309
Côtes-du-Rhône, 60, 63, 235, 248, 249, 257
Côtes-du-Rhône-Villages, 248, 249, 257
Coulée de Serrant, 269
Coulée de Serrant, Clos de la, 267, 269
Counoise, 80–81
Counterfeit wines, 915
Coupe, 192
Cousiño-Macul, 872
Crayères, 180, 190
Cream sherry, 461, 463, 464
Crémant d’Alsace, 281–82
Crémant de Limoux, 298
Crémant de Loire, 268
Cresta Blanca, 685, 731
Crete, 647, 655–56
Criolla, 81
Criolla chica, 864, 881, 884
Criolla grande, 881, 882, 884
Cristal, 192
Crljenak kastelanski, 416
Croissants, 601
Crozes-Hermitage, 236, 241, 244
Cruasé, 406
Cruciferous vegetables, 117
Crus Bourgeois du Médoc, 152–53
Cserszegi füszeres, 626, 628
Cuba de calor, 533
Cuvées des cardinals, 203
Cuvées des moines, 203
Cuvées des papes, 203
Cuverie, 148
Cuyo, 883
Cviček, 425, 427
Cynarin, 117
D
DAC (Districtus Austriae Controllatus), 598–99
D’Acosta, Hugo, 806
D’Agostini Winery, 723
Dagueneau, Didier, 266
Dank, wet cardboard aroma, 113
Dão, 513, 541–42
Dawson, Arthur, 707
Decanting, 133–34, 524–25
Deep-ditch cultivation, 911–12
Marcel Deiss, Domaine, 284
Delas Frères, 240
Delaware, 81, 918
Demi-sec, 177, 182, 270
Denominacions de Origen (DOs), 869
Denominazione di Origine Controllata (DOC), 142, 328–330
Denominazione di Origine Controllata e Garantita (DOCG), 328, 330, 967–68
Dessert wines, 129, 693–94
  see also Sweet wines; individual types
Diacetyl, 45, 112
Diamond Creek, 695
Diamond Mountain District, 698–99
Dias, Bartolomeu, 897
Dijon clones, 758, 761–62
Dinastía Vivanco, 441
Dirty sock aroma, 112
Distillation process, 316–17, 319–320
Distinctiveness, 5
Disznókö, 631
Diurnal temperature fluctuation, 21
DNA, grape, 55
DNA typing, 55
Dogs, 29
Dolce, 693
Dolceacqua, 407
Dolcetto, 81, 333, 334, 335, 338, 341–42
Dôle, 619
Dom Pérignon, 174, 175, 190, 192
Domaines, 199
Domestication of grapes, 26
Dominio de Pingus, 447
Dornfelder, 81, 550, 551
Dosage, 177, 182, 186
Douce noir, 81 Douro, 541
Doux Vouvray, 270, 273
Drainage, 27
Drupeggio, 410
Dry (term), 14
Dry Creek Valley, 709, 711
Dryness, 14–15
Duboeuf, Georges, 229
Dundee Hills, 758
Dungeness crabs, 682
Durand, José Luis, 806
Dureza, 72
Durif, 71, 81
Dürnstein, 604
Dutt, Gordon, 800
Dyson, John, 775
E
Easter eggs, 654
Echézeaux, 210
Eden Valley, 837
Edmunds, Steve, 248
Edna Valley, 733
Eggs, 117
Egri bikavér, 624, 627, 628
Ehrenfelser, 81
1855 Classification, 149–150, 151, 152, 965–67
Eisenberg DAC, 599
Eiswein, 129, 548, 555, 561, 597, 611
    see also Icewines
Emerald riesling, 81
Emilia-Romagna, 407–10, 967
Emotional response, 8
Encruzado, 81, 538
England, sparkling wine from, 188
Entre-Deux-Mers, 147, 164–65
Eola-Amity Hills, 758–59
Epernay, 190
Erasmus, Clos, 497
Ernst, Pierre, 176
Errázuriz, 867
Erste Lage, 558
Erstes Gewächs, 576
Erstes Lage, 576
Escondido Valley, 785
Espinoza, Álvaro, 874
Estufagem, 533
Ethanol, 10
Ethyl acetate, 112–13
Etruscans, 138, 141, 236, 383
Eucalyptus, 834
European Union wine laws, 142
Extra brut, 182
Extra-dry, 177, 182
Eyrie Vineyards, 754, 758
F
Factory House, 525
Fake butter aroma, 112
Falanghina, 82, 415
Falernian, 412, 413
Fall Creek Vineyards, 782
Farm Winery Act (1976), 769
Farming, 34–36
Faugères, 300
Federico Paternina, 441
Federspiel, 604
Feinherb, 554
Fendant. see Chasselas
Fermentation
  process of, 10, 39–40
  for red wines, 38–40
  stems and, 239
  understanding of, 37
  for white wines, 44
  wine color and, 38
  see also Yeasts
Fernández, Alejandro, 447
Ferrari, Giulio, 402–3
Ferro, Estaban, 807
Fetzer Vineyards, 718
Feudi di San Gregorio, 415
Fiano, 82, 414–15
Fiasco, 380
Fields, W. C., 119
Filtering, 43
Finger Lakes, 768, 775–76
Fining, 42–43, 205
Finish, 7, 110
Fino (Sherry), 460–61, 462, 465–66
First Growths, 144, 150, 151
  see also Premier Cru
First press, 41
Fisher, M.F.K., 706
Fleurie, 230
Flint, 24
Flor, 460–61
Florence, bars in, 392
Flower bottle, 176
Flowering, 18
Folle blanche, 82, 263, 316
Folle noire, 307
Fonseca, J. M. da, 541, 542
Food pairings, 115–120, 215, 256, 324, 466, 491, 523, 588, 761
Fort Ross-Seaview, 711
Fortified wines, 299, 825, 836
  see also individual types
Foudres, 253, 280
Fournier, Charles, 772
Foxiness, 793
France/French wines
  Alsace, 279–292
  Barsac, 969
  Beaujolais, 227–234
  Bordeaux, 143–172
  Burgundy, 197–226
  Champagne, 173–196
  classifications of, 968–69
  climate and, 140
  history of, 138–142
  Languedoc-Roussillon, 293–304
  Loire, 261–278
  map of, 136
  Médoc, 968–69
  overview of, 137–142
  Provence, 305–312
  Rhône, 235–260
  Sauternes, 969
  wine laws in, 923–24
  see also individual regions for further breakdown
Franciacorta, 404–05
Frank, Konstantin, 772–73
Franken, Germany, 587–88
Frankinja, 427
Franscioni, Gary, 727
Frasqueiria Madeira, 536
Free radicals, 127
Free run, 41
Freisa, 82
Freixenet, 474, 476, 477, 482
French colombard, 82, 678
French Revolution, 201, 207
French wine terms, 950–54
Frescobaldi, Lamberto, 375
Friedrich, Jacqueline, 269
Friulano, 82, 364, 366, 367, 368, 370
Friuli-Venezia Giluia
  DOCGs of, 967
  Gavi and, 342
  grapes of, 366
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 365–371
  most important wines of, 367
  overview of, 363–65
  quick sip on, 364
  visiting, 370
  wines to know from, 372–74
Fronsac, 147, 165
Frost, 22–23
Fruit wines, 745
Fruitfulness/fruitiness, 7, 14, 20
Fumé blanc, 69, 685
Furmint, 82, 594, 610, 624, 626, 628, 632, 635
Futures, 152
G
Gaglioppo, 82, 417
Gaja, Angelo, 334, 336
Galegos, 487
Galestro, 24, 388
Gallé, Émile, 176
Gallo, Ernest and Julio, 667, 669, 708–09
Gamay, 14, 59, 263, 811, 813
Gamay noir, 227–28, 229
Gancia, Carlo, 343
Gansu Province, 915
García Viadero, Yolanda, 430
Garganega, 82, 352, 353
Garigue, 297, 306
Garnacha
 in Calatayud and Campo de Borja, 504
 description of, 60
 in Penedès, 475, 476
 in Priorat, 496, 498
 in Ribera del Duero, 449
 in Rioja, 437, 438
 see also Grenache
Garnacha blanca, 82, 437
Gascony, 313–14
Gattinara, 333, 338–39
Gavi, 333, 342
Gehry, Frank, 441
Gelber muskateller, 82, 595
Gemischter satz, 617–18
Georgia, Republic of, 641–43
Germain-Robin, Hubert, 716
Germany/German wines
 acidity and, 548–49
 aging and, 558
 Ahr, 586
 Austria compared to, 592
 Baden, 586–87
 beer and, 561
 botrytized wine from, 574
 Burgundy and, 549
 foods of, 560–64
 Franken, 587–88
 grapes of, 550
 labels from, 556
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 549, 551–53
 map of, 546
 Mittelrhein, 588
 Mosel, 565–572
 most important wines of, 551
 Nahe, 589
 organization and categorization of, 553–59
 overview of, 547–48
 Pfalz, 579–584
 quick sip on, 548
 Rheingau, 537–578
 Rheinhessen, 589
 ripeness categories for, 554–56
 sekt, 559–560
 sweetness categories for, 554–56
 terroir and, 548–49
 vineyard hierarchy in, 558
 vineyard names and, 552
 visiting, 562
 wine laws in, 926
 wine terms of, 960–64
 see also individual regions for further breakdown
Gewürztraminer
 in Alsace, 282, 283, 285–86
 in Baden, 587
 in California, 678
 in Canada, 811, 813
 description of, 59–60
 flavor of, 14
 in Germany, 550
 in New York State, 769, 770
 in New Zealand, 851, 852
 pairing with food, 118
 in Pfalz, 581
 in Portugal, 540
 in Trentino-Alto Adige, 403
 in Washington State, 745
Ghemme, 333, 338–39
Gigondas, 60, 71, 248, 249, 254–55
Gimblett Gravels, 853
Gini, 356
Girò, 82, 422
Gisborne, 853
Glassware, 134, 135, 191–92, 354–55
Glera, 82–83, 352, 356
Glossary of grapes, 76–100
Glutamates, 105, 109
Glycerol, 10
Glycoproteins, 41
Gneiss, 24
Godello, 83
Gold Rush, 675
González Byass, 468
Goriška Brda, 426–27
Gouais blanc, 55, 58, 59, 83
Goumenissa, 647
Gouveio, 83, 514, 538
Grace Vineyard, 914
Graci, 419
Graciano, 83, 437, 438
Grahm, Randall, 17, 725
Graillot, Alain, 244
Gran Coronas Black Label (Mas La Plana), 482
Gran Selezione, 387
Grand Chemarin, Le, 265
Grand Cru, 203, 282–84
Grands Echézeaux, 210
Granite, 24
Grapes
  domestication of, 26
  glossary of, 76–100
  life cycle of, 19
  matching to ground, 28–30
  percentage of grapes, for labeling, 56
  pollination of, 33
  species of, 58
  variety of, 53–54
  see also individual types
Grappa, 328, 355
Grappa di monovitigno, 328
Graševina, 83
Grauburgunder, 83, 550, 551, 581, 587
Gravel, 24
Graves, 147, 149, 150, 155–57
Grechetto, 83, 410
Greco, 83, 414–15
Greco di Bianco, 417
Greece
 foods of, 656–58
 grapes of, 651
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 650, 652–56
 map of, 644
 modern wine industry in, 648
 most important wines of, 647
 overview of, 645–48
 quick sip on, 646
 visiting, 655
 wine laws in, 927
 wine regions of, 652–54
 wine terms of, 965
 wines to know from, 659–663
Green, as term, 69
Greening, Nigel, 849
Grenache
 in Australia, 824, 825, 829, 833
 in California, 677, 680
 description of, 60–61
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
 in Provence, 307
 in Rhône, 238
 in southern Rhône, 236, 252, 253, 256
 see also Garnacha
Grenache blanc, 83, 238, 296, 307
Greywacke, 24
Grignolino, 83
Grillo, 83, 418
Grolleau, 83, 263, 269
Groot Constantia, 895, 901
Grosses Gewächs, 576
Grosses Lage, 558
Grover Vineyards, 922
Gruet, 801
Grüner veltliner, 61, 593, 594, 595–96
Guadalupe Valley, 806–07
Guigal, 240
Gumboot Clone, 855
Gutedel, 83, 550, 587
Gutswein, 558
Gyropalettes, 186, 477
H
Hail, 21, 178, 388, 424, 886
Halbtrocken, 554
Half-bottle, 187
Halkidiki, 647
Ham, 466, 469, 794
Hanepoot. see Muscat
Hang time, 10
Hanns Kornell, 692
Hanson, Anthony, 211
Happy Canyon, 735, 737
Haraszthy, Agoston, 670, 708
Harding, Julia, 54, 55, 645–46
Hardpan, 24
Hargrave, Louisa and Alex, 776
Hargrave Vineyard, 776
Harlan Estate, 56, 695
Harrison, Jim, 694
Hárslevelu, 84, 624, 626, 628, 632, 635–36
Harvesting, 36, 43
Hass, Robert, 732
Haut Armagnac, 315–16
Haut-Brion, Château, 150, 151, 156
Haut-Médoc, 149, 153
Hawke’s Bay, 853
Hazan, Victor, 356
Hebei Province, 913
Heitz Martha’s Vineyard, 679
Hemingway, Ernest, 435
Henderson, Alexander, 138
Hermitage, 71, 235, 236, 241, 242–43
Hermitage Blanc, 243
Heurigen, 600, 618
Heymann, Hildegaarde, 108, 111
High Plains, 784–85
Hillcrest Vineyard, 754
History of Ancient and Modern Wines, A (Henderson), 138
Hobbs, Paul, 888
Hock, 576
Hohnen, David, 841
Hondarrabi zuri, 84, 502
Hondarribi beltza, 84
Horse blanket aromas, 112
Hospices de Beaune, 217
Hôtel Dieu, 213, 217
Howell Mountain, 698–99
Huangjiu, 909
Hudson River Valley, 774–75
Hudson Vineyard, 705
Hugel, 283
Humagne blanche, 620
Huneeus, Agustin, 866
Hungary
    botrytized wine from, 574
    classifications of, 623
    grapes of, 626–27
    land, grapes, and vineyards of, 624–28
    map of, 622
    most important wines of, 628
    overview of, 623–24
    quick sip on, 625
    Tokaji, 628–636
    visiting, 631
    wine laws in, 927
    wine regions of, 625–27
    wine terms of, 964
    wines to know from, 637–640
Hunter Valley, 838–39
Husmann, George, 800
Huxelrebe, 84, 550
Hybrids, 316, 771
Hyde Vineyard, 705
Hydrogen sulfide, 113
I
Ice cider, 816
Icewines
    from Canada, 809, 810, 813, 815–16
    from China, 913
    from New York State, 772
    serving, 129
  see also Eiswein
Idaho, 802
Igneous rock, 22
Ikeda, Kikunae, 109
Incisa della Rochetta, Mario, 382, 383
Indage, Chateau, 922
India, 921–22
Indication Géographique Protégée (IGP), 142
Indicazione Geografica Tipica (IGT), 328, 330
Inglenook, 670, 675, 695
Inner Mongolia, 915–16
Institut National des Appellations d’Origine (INAO), 177, 232
Integration, 5, 6
International Riesling Foundation (IRF), 67
Inzolia. see Ansonica Irrigation, 22
Irsai Olivér, 84, 626, 628
Isabella, 84
Italy
  Abruzzi, 412–13
  Apulia, 415–17
  Basilicata, 417
  Calabria, 417
  Campania, 414–15
  DOCGs of, 967–68
  Emilia-Romagna, 407–410
  fine wine revolution in, 327–330
  Friuli-Venezia Giluia, 363–374
  geography of, 325–26
  Liguria, 406–07
  Lombardy, 404–06
  map of, 322
  overview of, 323–27
    Piedmont, 331–348
    Sardinia, 417, 418, 422
    Sicily, 417–422
    southern peninsula of, 413–17
    Trentino-Alto Adige, 402–04
    Tuscany, 375–400
    Umbria, 410–12
    Veneto, 349–362
    wine laws in, 924
    wine terms of, 954–57
    see also individual regions for further breakdown
Izkiriot ttipi, 84
J
Jaboulet Aîné, Paul, 240, 243
Jacob’s Creek, 825
Jadot, Louis, 206–07
Jaen. see Mencía
Jaén, 538, 542
Jamón, 466, 469
Japan, 917–920
Jean León, 482
Jefferson, Thomas, 156, 666, 671, 791–92, 793
Jefford, Andrew, 116
Jensen, Josh, 727
Jerez
    foods of, 466–69
    land, grapes, and vineyards of, 456–58
    map of, 455
    overview of, 455–56
    visiting, 466
    wines to know from, 470–72
    see also Sherry
Jermann, 65
Jermann, Silvio, 368
Jeroboam, 187
Jilin Province, 914
Johnson, Hugh, 157, 630, 648
Joint-ventures
  Chile and, 867
  China and, 910
Judgment of Paris Tasting (1976), 671, 678–79, 724
Judgment of Princeton, 804
Juhfark, 84, 624, 626, 628
Juliénas, 230
Jumilla, 506
Jurade de Saint-Émilion, 161
K
Kabar, 627, 632
Kabinett, 554
Kadarka, 84, 624, 627
Kamptal DAC, 599
Kasper, Lynne Rosetto, 407–08
Kawakami, Zenbei, 919
Kékfrankos, 84, 624, 627, 628
Kékoportó, 624, 627, 628
Kendall-Jackson, 717
Kerner, 84–85, 550, 559, 587
Khikhvi, 85
Királyleánkya, 85, 626, 627, 628
Kirschwasser, 564
Kiwi, 855
Klein Constantia, 895, 901
Kloster Eberbach, 551, 562
Kloster Und, 618
KMW (Klosterneuburger Mostwage scale), 597
Knight Valley, 709
Kokumi, 108–9
Korbel, 692
Kosher wine, 50, 773
Koshu, 85, 918, 919–920
Kotsifali, 85, 651, 656
Kouloura method, 650, 655
Kövérszölö, 627, 632
Kramer, Matt, 102
Krassato, 85, 651, 653
Kremstal DAC, 599
Krug, 189, 192
Krupp, 42
Kunde Century Vines, 690
KWV (Ko-operatieve Wijnbouwers Vereniging van Zuid Afrika), 896
L
La Tâche, 210
Labels
    German, 556
    Hungarian, 624–25
    Italian wine and, 324
    in United States, 671
    varietal percentages and, 56
Lacrima di Morro d’Alba, 85
Lacryma Christi, 415
Laetitia, 733
Lafite-Rothschild, Château, 151, 153, 154, 909, 910–11, 913
Lagar, 431, 516–17
Lageder, Alois, 65
Lagrein, 85, 403
Lake County, 717
Lamb, 256, 441, 452, 658
Lambrusco, 85, 409
Lancers, 541
Lang, George, 631
Langtry Estate & Vineyard, 717
Languedoc-Roussillon
  categories of wine from, 297–98
  grapes of, 296
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 298–99
  most important wines of, 295
  overview of, 293–95, 297
  quick sip on, 294
  syrah in, 71
  top villages of, 299–301
  viognier in, 73
  visiting, 301
  wines to know from, 302–04
Lanzarote, 502, 503
Laški rizling. see Welschriesling
Late-harvest wines, 693
Latour, Château, 56, 151, 152, 153, 154
Lattara, 138, 141
Lauder, Ronald, 631
Laws regarding wine
  in Argentina, 929
  in Australia, 928
  in Austria, 926–27
  in Canada, 928
  in Chile, 929
  in European Union, 142
  in France, 137, 923–24
  in Germany, 926
  in Greece, 927
  in Hungary, 927
  in Italy, 327–330, 924
  in New Zealand, 928–29
  in Portugal, 925–26
  in South Africa, 929–930
  in Spain, 925
  in United States, 927–28
Lazio, 967
Lead crystal, 125
Lees, 44, 45, 48, 205
Leeuwin Estate, 841
Left Bank (Bordeaux), 148–49
Legs, 12
Leithaberg DAC, 599
Lemberger, 85, 745
Length, 7
Lenoir, 85, 784
Léoville-Barton, 154
Léoville-Las Cases, 154
Léoville-Poyferré, 154
Les Baux de Provence, 308
Leste, 533
Lett, David, 754, 758, 760
Levitin, Daniel, 102
Liaoning Province, 913
Liatiko, 86
Librandi, 417
Liebfraumilch, 559
Lieblich, 554
Lieu-dit, 202
Life cycle of grapes, 19
Liger-Belair, Gérard, 187
Liguria, 406–07
Lillet, 160
Limestone, 24, 179, 211, 727
Limnio, 86, 651
Limpidity, 114
Lindemans, 825
Liqueur de tirage, 185
Liqueur d’expédition, 182, 186
Listán prieto, 86, 503, 669, 674, 864, 881
Listrac, 147, 153, 164
Livermore Valley, 731–32
Livingstone-Learmonth, John, 254
Lladoner pelut, 296
Llano Estacado Winery, 782–83
Llemberger, 748
Llicorella, 25
Loam, 25
Lobster, 215
Loess, 25
Loire Valley
  chenin blanc in, 58–59
  climate of, 140
  eastern, 263–67
  grapes of, 263
  map of, 261
  middle, 267–274
  most important wines of, 264
  overview of, 261–63
  quick sip on, 262
  sauvignon blanc in, 69
  visiting, 271
  western, 274
  wines to know from, 275–78
Loire Valley Chinon, 55
Lombardy, 404–06, 967
Long Island, 776
Longoria, Rick, 736, 737
Loose polish filtration, 43
López de Heredia, R., 441
Louis-Benjamin Dagueneau, 266
Loureira, 487
Loureiro, 538, 540
Lower Austria
  DAC and, 599
  map of, 603
  overview of, 603–05
  wines to know from, 606–08
Lungarotti, 411–12
Lynch, Kermit, 6, 671
M
Macabeo, 86, 475, 476, 478, 504
Macarons, 167
Maccabeo, 238
Maccabeu, 296
Mâconnais, 200, 202, 208, 218–19
Macroclimate, 18
Maculan, 351
Madeira
  cooking with, 119
  grapes of, 534–35
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 532–33
  overview of, 531–32
  process of making, 533–34
 quality levels of, 535–36
 serving, 129, 536
 styles of, 534–35
 sweetness levels of, 535
Madeira Wine Company, 536
Madeleine Angevine, 86, 748
Madeleine royale, 551
Maderization, 533–34
Madhu, 921
Magdeleine noire des Charentes, 61, 62, 86
Magnum, 187
Maipo Valley, 871–72
Malagousia, 86, 651, 652
Malbec
 in Argentina, 881, 882, 884, 887
 in Bordeaux, 145, 146–47
 in California, 680
 derivation of, 885
 description of, 61–62
 in Texas, 784
 in Washington State, 745
 see also Cot/Côt (malbec)
Malmsey, 533, 534, 535
 see also Malvasia
Malolactic fermentation, 40, 44–45, 112, 205
Malvasia, 86–87, 410, 437, 503
 see also malmsey
Malvasia bianca lunga, 378, 379, 382–83
Malvasia della Lipari, 418, 420, 421
Malvasia fina, 514, 533, 538
Malvasia nera di Brindisi, 416
Malvoisie. see Vermentino
Mamertine, 418
Mammolo, 87
Mandela, Nelson, 899
Mandilaria, 87, 651, 655, 656
Mantinia, 647
Mantonakis, Antonia, 103
Manure aromas, 112
Manzanilla, 460–61, 462, 465–66
Maori, 850, 853
Marche, 967
Maréchal Foch, 87
Margaret River, 824, 841
Margaux, 147, 149, 154
Margaux, Château, 151, 154
Maribor, 427
Marl, 25
Marnier-Lapostolle, Alexandra, 863, 867
Marsala, 119, 421–22
Marsanne, 87, 236, 238, 239, 243–44, 296, 307, 678
Marsden, Samuel, 850
Marselan, 87, 238
Martinborough, 854, 856
Mas de Daumas Gassac, 297–98
Mastroberardino, 415
Matching grapes to ground, 28–30
Mateus, 541
Maturana blanca, 437
Maturana tinta, 437
Maturano, 437
Mauzac, 87, 296, 298
Mavrodaphne, 87, 651
Mavrodaphne of Patras, 647, 654
Mavrotragano, 87
Mavrouda, 87
Mayacamas, 679
Mazuelo, 87–88, 437, 438
McGovern, Patrick, 26, 141, 921
McLaren Vale, 837
McMinnville, 759
McPherson, Clinton, 782–83
Médoc, 63, 146, 149–150, 153–55
Meissner, Georg, 109
Melon de Bourgogne, 88, 263, 274
Mencía, 88, 502
Mendocino
 description of, 716–19
 visiting, 718
 wines to know from, 720–22
Mendoza, 881, 883, 887–88
Menetou-Salon, 266–67
Mercaptan compounds, 113, 117
Merlot
 in Argentina, 884
 in Australia, 824, 829
 in Bordeaux, 145, 146–47
 in California, 674, 677, 680, 686
 in Canada, 811
 Chianti Classico and, 386
 in Chile, 866, 869, 872
 in China, 912
 description of, 62–63
 in Friuli, 366, 367, 370
 in Hungary, 627, 628
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
  in New York State, 769, 770
  in New Zealand, 852
  in Oregon, 759
  pairing with food, 120
  in Penedès, 475, 476
  in Priorat, 498
  in South Africa, 898, 901
  Super Tuscans and, 381
  in Switzerland, 619
  in Texas, 784
  in Tuscany, 378
  in Uruguay, 888
  in Veneto, 351, 352
  in Virginia, 794, 795
  in Washington State, 743–44, 745, 748
Merlot blanc, 147
Mesoclimates, 18, 325–26, 375, 386
Metamorphic rock, 22
Methuselah, 187
Mevushal kosher wine, 50
Mexico, 805–7
Mezedes, 656–57
Mezzadria, 386
Michael, Peter, 709
Michigan, 803
Microclimate, 18
Mildara, 825
Millbrook, 775
Miller, Mark, 101
Millet, François, 197, 220
Minerality, 107
Minho, 539–540
Mission grapes, 88, 669, 674, 676, 681, 733, 781, 864
Missouri, 800–01
Mistral, Le, 237, 248, 250, 307
Mitchell, Evan and Brand, 6
Mittelburgenland DAC, 599
Mittelrhein, Germany, 588
Moelleux Vouvray, 270, 272–73
Moët & Chandon, 692
Moët Hennessy, 911
Moldy aroma, 112
Molinara, 88, 352, 353
Monastrell, 63, 88, 475, 476, 506
Mondavi, Robert, 669, 686, 695, 697, 880
Robert Mondavi Winery, 867
Mondeuse blanche, 72, 73, 237, 239, 689
Monemvasia, 88
Monopoles, 205
Montagne de Reims, 180–81
Montalbano, 385
Montana Wines, 854
Montelena, Chateau, 679
Montepulciano, 88, 391, 411
Montepulciano d’Aruzzo, 413
Monterey County, 725–26
Montespertoli, 385
Montilla-Moriles, 459
Montlouis, 273
Montrachet, Le, 210
Montsant, 498
Montserrat, 484
Moors, 465
Morellino di Scansano, 377
Morgon, 230
Morillon, 594, 615–16
Morio-muskat, 88
Moscatel, 88, 457
Moscatel bianco, 457
Moscatel de Setúbal, 542
Moscatel roxo, 542
Moscato, 334, 335, 343, 677
Moscato d’Asti, 333, 335, 344
Moscato passito di Pantelleria, 418, 420–21
Moschofilero, 88, 651
Mosel
 description of, 565–68
 map of, 565
 villages and vineyards of, 567
 wines to know from, 569–572
Moueix, Jean-Pierre, 163
Moulin-à-Vent, 230, 231
Moulis, 147, 153, 164
Mount Eden Vineyards, 724, 725
Mount Harlan, 726, 727
Mount Veeder, 698–99
Mourvèdre
 in Australia, 825, 829
 in California, 681
 description of, 63
 grenache and, 61
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
 in Provence, 307
 in Rhône, 236, 238, 252, 253, 256
Mouthfeel, 107, 108
Mouton-Rothschild, Château, 151, 153, 154, 867
Mtsvane, 642–43
Mtsvane kakhuri, 88–89
Mugnier, Paul, 518
Müller, Antoine, 176
Müller-Catoir, 580
Müller-Thurgau, 89, 402, 550, 551, 559, 587
Munson, T. V., 34, 783
Andrew Murray Vineyards, 734
Murrieta, Marqués de, 433
Musailaisi, 916
Muscadel, 89
Muscadelle, 89, 145, 147, 828
Muscadet, 89, 274
Muscadet de Sèvre-et-Maine, 274
Muscardin, 89, 238
Muscat
  in Alsace, 282, 285, 286
  asparagus and, 286
  in Australia, 825, 835, 840
  in California, 677
  description of, 63–64
  dessert wines from, 693, 694
  in Hungary, 628
  pairing with food, 118
  in Penedès, 475
  serving, 129
  in Texas, 785
Muscat Bailey A, 919
Muscat blanc à petits grains, 238, 296, 299, 651, 654, 694, 828, 895
Muscat canelli, 678, 748, 784
Muscat de Beaumes-de-Venise, 249, 251, 255
Muscat de Frontignan, 299, 898
Muscat de Rivesaltes, 299
Muscat de St.-Jean-de-Minervois, 299
Muscat lunel, 626
Muscat noir, 238
Muscat of Alexandria, 296, 881, 898
Muscat of Patras, 647, 654
Muscat of Samos, 647, 654
Mushrooms, wild, 440
Muskateller, 89, 550, 594, 616
Musky (term), 62
Mussels, 300
Must, 38
N
Nahe, Germany, 589
Nail polish remover aroma, 112–13
Naoussa, 647
Napa Valley
 AVAs in, 697–99
 climate of, 696
 overview of, 695–97
 during the sixties, 698
 soil of, 696
 visiting, 695
 wines to know from, 700–704
Napoléon, 895
Napoleonic Code (1804), 201, 207
National Wine Company (NAWICO), 745
Navarro Vineyards, 694, 719
Nebbiolo, 64–65, 326, 332, 334, 335–37, 338, 406, 807
Nebbiolo d’Alba, 333, 338
Nebuchadnezzar, 187
Nederburg Auction, 901
Négociants, 206–7, 229, 262, 274
Negoska, 89, 651
Negramoll, 89
Negrara, 89, 352, 353
Negrette, 89
Negroamaro, 89, 416
Nelson, 854
Nemea, 647, 654
Nerello cappuccio, 89, 419
Nerello Mascalese, 89–90, 419
Nero d’Avola, 90, 420
Nero di Troia, 90, 416
Nestlé Company, 621
Neuburger, 90, 594, 605
Neusiedl (lake), 609–10
Neusiedlersee DAC, 599
New Boke of the Natures and Properties of All Wines, A (Turner), 138
New Jersey, 804
New Mexico, 801
New South Wales, 838–39
New York State
 Finger Lakes, 775–76
 grapes of, 769–773
 Hudson River Valley, 774–75
 land of, 773–74
 Long Island, 776
 map of, 767
 most important wines of, 769
 number of vineyards in, 670
 overview of, 767–69
 quick sip on, 768
 visiting, 774
 wines to know from, 777–780
New York Wine and Culinary Center, 774
New Zealand
 foods of, 856
 grapes of, 852
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 851–56
 map of, 848
 most important wines of, 851
 overview of, 849–851
 quick sip on, 850
 visiting, 856
 wine laws in, 928–29
  wines to know from, 857–861
Niagara, 90, 769, 770, 919
Niagara Falls, 812
Niebaum, Gustave, 670, 695
Nightingale, Myron, 693
Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, 914
Noble, Ann, 110
Nonino, 328
Non-mevushal kosher wine, 50
North Central Hills, California
  description of, 724–27
  visiting, 727
  wines to know from, 728–730
Northwest (Argentina), 883
Norton, 90, 794, 795, 800
Nosiola, 404
Novello wine, 359
Numanthia, 507
O
Oak
  alternatives to, 49
  barrels from, 42, 44, 48, 435–36
  effects of, 48–51
  forests of, 46, 48
  see also Barrel aging
Oakville, 699
Observations—Historical, Critical, and Medical (Barry), 138
Oechsle, 555
Off-dry wines, 14, 51–52
Oidium, 434, 474, 851
Oily aroma, 112
Okanagan Valley, 814–15
Olasz rizling, 624, 626, 628
Old Mission Peninsula, 803
Old Vine Charter, 831
Old vines, 831
Olfaction, 102–5
Olive oil, 385, 415–16
Oloroso, 119, 129, 461, 463, 464
Olson, Leonard, 803
Opus One, 695
Orange muscat, 678, 694
Oregon
  appellations of, 758–59
  chardonnay from, 761–62
  climate of, 757
  grapes of, 759
  land of, 755–57
  map of, 753
  most important wines of, 755
  number of vineyards in, 670
  overview of, 753–55
  pinot noir from, 759–761
  quick sip on, 754
  visiting, 757
  wine laws in, 754
  wines to know from, 763–66
  women winemakers and, 756
Organic farming, 35
Ori, Chateau d’, 922
Ormeasco, 407
Orthonasal olfaction, 103
Ortswein, 558
Orvieto, 410–11
Oseleta, 90, 352
Ostertag, Andre, 283
Ostertag, Domaine, 284
Ott, Domaines, 309
Ottonel muskotály, 626, 628, 636
Ough, Cornelius, 126
Overripeness, 10
Ovid, 674
Oxidation, 126–27
Oxydized aroma, 113
Oxygen, 50–51
P
Paint thinner aroma, 112–13
País, 90, 864, 866
Palacios, Alvaro, 497, 504
Palmer, Château, 154
Palo cortado, 129, 462–63
Palomino, 90
Palomino fino, 457, 506
Paprika, 632
Parellada, 90, 432, 475, 476, 478, 482
Parker Bowles, Camilla, 188
Parral system, 880, 888
Paso Robles, 732–34
Pasta, 327, 345
Pasteur, Louis, 37
Pasteurization, 50, 51
Pastis, 308
Patagonia, 883
Paternina, 435
Patras, 647, 654
Pauillac, 147, 149, 153, 154–55
Paul Bruno, Domaine, 866
Pays d’Auge, 315
Pays d’Oc IGP (Indication Géographique Protégée), 298
Pear brandy, 762
Pedernã, 90
Pedro Ximénez (PX), 15, 90, 129, 457, 461, 463, 464
Peloursin, 90
Penedès
  cava, 476–481
  foods of, 483–84
  grapes of, 475
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 474–76
  overview of, 473–74
  quick sip on, 474
  still wines from, 482–83
  visiting, 482
Penfolds, 825, 826, 832, 834–35, 838
Penner-Ash, Lynn, 756
Pennsylvania, 802
Pennsylvania Wine Quality Initiative, 802
Percentage of grapes, for labeling, 56
Pérignon, Dom Pierre, 174, 175, 190
Periquita, 90–91, 538, 542
Pernod Ricard, 825
Perrier-Jouët, 176, 177, 192
Peru, 870
Pesquera, 445, 447, 448
Pessac-Léognan, 147, 149, 150
Peter, Daniel, 621
Petit corbu, 91
Petit manseng, 91, 888
Petit verdot, 91, 145, 146–47, 677, 681, 794, 795
Petite arvine, 620
Petite sirah/petite syrah, 71, 91, 677, 681
Petrol, 557
Pétrus, Château, 63, 162, 164
Peynaud, Emile, 108, 653
Peyraud, Lulu, 307
Pfalz
  description of, 579–581
  map of, 579
  name of, 580
  villages and vineyards of, 580
  wines to know from, 582–84
Pfalzgrafenstein Castle, 586
Phenols, 49
Phoenicians, 141
Phylloxera
  Argentina and, 886
  in Australia, 824, 839
  in California, 676–77
  Chile and, 865
  in France, 139
  in Greece, 648
  history of, 30–31
  in India, 922
  Munson and, 783
  in New Zealand, 851
  Penedès and, 474, 477
  in Rhône, 254
  in Rioja, 434
  rootstocks and, 33
  in South Africa, 895
  Tokaji and, 629
  United States and, 667, 670, 676
  Washington State and, 747
Picardan, 91, 238
Picolit, 91, 366, 367, 371
Picpoul, 238, 296
Picpoul noir, 238, 296
Picquepoul blanc, 91
Piedirosso, 415
Piedmont
  arneis, 342
  Asti, 343–44
  Barbaresco, 331–32, 333–34, 335–38
  barbera, 339, 341
  Barolo, 331–32, 333–34, 335–38
  DOCGs of, 968
  dolcetto, 341–42
  foods of, 344–45
  Gattinara, 338–39
  Gavi, 342
  Ghemme, 338–39
  grapes of, 54, 64–65, 334
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 333–35
  map of, 331
  moscato d’Asti, 344
  most important wines of, 333
  nebbiolo d’Alba, 338
  overview of, 331–33
  quick sip on, 332
  spanna, 338–39
  visiting, 344
  viticulture and, 20
  wines to know from, 346–48
Pieropan, 356
Pigato, 407
Pignolo, 91, 365, 366, 367, 369
Pineau d’aunis, 263
Pingus, 445
Pinney, Thomas, 674
Pinot bianco, 352, 366, 367
Pinot blanc, 66, 91, 282, 285, 286–87, 402, 405, 593, 620
Pinot grigio
  in California, 674, 680, 683–84
  in Friuli, 364–65, 366, 367, 368
  in Trentino-Alto Adige, 402, 403
  in Veneto, 351, 352
  in Washington State, 745
Pinot gris
  in Alsace, 282, 283, 285, 286
  in California, 674, 677, 678, 680, 683–84
  in Canada, 811, 813
  description of, 65–66
  in New Zealand, 851, 852
  in Oregon, 755, 759
  in Switzerland, 620
  in Washington State, 745
Pinot meunier, 66, 91–92, 178, 179–180, 184, 188, 263
Pinot noir
  aerating and, 133
  in Alsace, 282, 285, 287
  in Australia, 825, 829
  in Burgundy, 198, 202, 204, 210, 211–12, 214
  in California, 674, 677, 680, 681, 686–87
  in Canada, 811, 813
  in Carneros, 705
  for cava, 478
  Champagne and, 178, 179–180, 188
  chardonnay and, 58
  in Chile, 866
  in China, 912
  description of, 66–67
  in Edna Valley, 733
  Franciacorta and, 405
  gamay and, 59
  in Germany, 551
  in Hungary, 627, 628
  in Loire, 263
  in New York State, 770
  in New Zealand, 851, 852, 854, 855–56
  in Oregon, 754, 755, 756, 757, 759–761
  pairing with food, 118
  as parent grape, 55
  in Penedès, 475
  salmon and, 761
  in Santa Cruz, 725
  in Santa Lucia Highlands, 726–27
  in Sonoma County, 710
  in South Africa, 898
  in South Central Coast, 737–38
  in Switzerland, 619
Pinotage, 92, 894, 896, 898, 901
Piquepoul noir, 92
Pisco, 868
Pisoni, Gary, 727
Pisoni Vineyards, 727
Pittas, 657
Planchon, Jules-Emile, 33
Plavac mali, 92
Pliny, 236
Podravje, 425, 427
Pol Roger, 192
Pollination of grapes, 33
Pomerol, 147, 149, 150, 162–63
Pommard clone, 758
Pommerelle, 745
Pommery wine, 177
Pontallier, Paul, 866
Pork, 289
Port
  aged tawny, 519–520
  aging and storing, 526–27
  as birth present, 518
  chocolate and, 57
  colheita, 521
  colleges and, 524
  cooking with, 119
  crusted, 521
  decanting and drinking, 133–34, 524–26
  flavor paradox of, 519
  garrafeira, 521
  grapes of, 514
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 512–16
  late-bottled vintage, 521
  opened bottles of, 526
  overview of, 511–12
  pairing with food, 120
  process of making, 516–18
  quick sip on, 512
  recent vintage years for, 522
 reserve, 520
 serving, 129
 single-quinta vintage, 523–24
 styles of, 518–524
 sugar in, 15
 tempranillo in, 73
 top shippers of, 516
 vintage, 521–23
 white, 519
 wines to know, 528–530
 young tawny, 520
Porto Carras, Domaine, 653
Port-style wines
 in Australia, 825, 836
 from California, 693
 in California, 677, 693–94
Portugal
 Alentejo, 542
 Bairrada, 542
 Dão, 541–42
 Douro, 541
 Madeira, 531–36
 map of, 508
 Minho, 539–540
 most important wines of, 513
 overview of, 509–510
 Port, 511–530
 ports to know, 528–530
 table wines, 537–545
 visiting, 522
 wine laws in, 925–26
 wines to know from, 543–45
Portuguese wine terms, 959–960
Posavje, 425, 427
Postfermentation maceration, 40
Pouget, Michel Aimé, 882
Pouilly-Fumé, 266
Poussie, Clos de la, 265
Prats, Bruno, 866
Precision, 6
Premier Cru, 150, 202–03
  see also First Growths
Premières Côtes de Blaye, 147
Prié, 92
Primitivo, 75, 92, 416
Primorska, 425–26
Priorat, 60, 495–500
Prisoner, The, 690
Prohibition, 667, 668–69, 670, 677, 769
  see also Abstinence; temperance movement
Prosciutto, 371
Prosecco, 92, 350, 351, 356, 359
Protected Designation of Origin (PDO), 142, 297
Protected Geographical Indication (PGI), 142
Provence
  grapes of, 307
  most important wines of, 309
  mourvèdre in, 63
  overview of, 305–07
  quick sip on, 306
  Romans and, 138
  visiting, 308
  wines to know from, 310–12
Prugnolo, 391
Prunelard, 61
Pruning, 34–35
Pulque, 783
Pumping over, 40
Pumpkinseed oil, 598, 615
Punching down, 40
Punt, 185
Pupitre, 185–86
Puttonyos, 629, 633–34
Pyrazines, 55, 57, 104
Q
Quady, 694
Quarts de Chaume, 59, 129, 268, 269
Quartz, 25
Quincy, 267
Quinta Nacional, 882
Quintano, Manuel, 433
Qvevri, 642, 643
R
Rabigato, 514
Racking, 42
Raenscroft, George, 125
Rain, 21, 22
Rainwater, 534
Rapsani, 647
Rapuzzi, Paolo, 369
Rare Wine Company, 536
Rasteau, 249
Ratti, Renato, 339
Jochen Ratzenberger, 588
Ravat blanc. see Vignoles
Ravenscroft, George, 354
Raventós, José, 476
Readiness, 128, 130
Rebula, 427
  see also Ribolla gialla
Recency effect, 103
Recioto della Velpolicella, 129, 351, 359
Recioto di Soave, 351, 355
Recioto wine, 350–51
Red wine
  grapes for, 54–57, 59, 60–63, 64–65, 66–67, 68, 70–73, 74–75
  making of, 38–43
  pairing with food, 118
  popularity of, 70
  see also individual types
Reed, Bob, 782–83
Refosco, 92, 366, 367, 369, 426
Refosco del botton, 369
Régnié, 230
Reims, 180, 181, 190
Rémuage, 176–77, 477
Rémueur, 185
Renski rizling, 92
Restaurante Xeito, 488
Retronasal breathing, 110
Retronasal olfaction, 103
Retsina, 646, 647, 649, 653
Reuilly, 267
Rheingau
  classifications of, 576
  description of, 573–76
  map of, 573
  villages and vineyards of, 575
 wines to know from, 577–78
Rheinhessen, Germany, 589
Rheinterrasse, 589
Rhoditis, 93
Rhône (wine and region)
 decanting, 134
 grapes of, 238
 leading appellations of, 240
 major appellations and principal grapes of, 241, 249
 map of, 235
 most important wines of, 240
 northern, 236–247
 overview of, 235–36
 pairing with food, 118
 quick sip on, 236
 southern, 248–260
 visiting, 257
 wines to know from, 245–47, 258–260
Rhône blends, in California, 677
Rhône Valley, 71
Rhône-style wines, 688
Rías Baixas
 albariño in, 54
 foods of, 490–91
 grapes of, 487
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 488–490
 overview of, 485–88
 quick sip on, 486
 visiting, 489
 wines to know from, 492–94
Ribbon Ridge, 759
Ribera del Duero
  classifications of, 450–52
  crianza, 450–52
  foods of, 452
  gran reserva, 450–52
  grapes of, 449
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 448–450
  overview of, 445–48
  quick sip on, 446
  reserva, 450–52
  visiting, 450
  wines to know from, 453–54
Ribolla gialla, 92, 366, 367, 368
Ricasoli, Bettino, 382
Richebourg, 210
Riddling, 176–77, 185–86
Ridge Monte Bello Vineyard, 679
Ridge Vineyards, 689–690, 724–25, 734
Riedel, Georg, 597
Rieslaner, 92, 550, 551, 581, 587
Riesling
  in Alsace, 282, 283, 284, 285
  in Australia, 824, 825, 828, 829–830, 837
  in Austria, 593, 594, 595
  in Baden, 587
  in California, 677, 678
  in Canada, 811, 813
  description of, 67
  dessert wines from, 693
  food pairings and, 588
  in Germany, 550, 551
  minerality of, 107
  in Mittelrhein, 588
  in New York State, 769, 770, 771–72
  in New Zealand, 851, 852
  in Oregon, 755, 759
  pairing with food, 118, 120
  petrol and, 557
  in Pfalz, 580–81
  in Rheingau, 573–75
  in Rheinhessen, 589
  sekt and, 559
  serving, 129
  in Sicily, 419
  in Washington State, 743, 745, 748
Riesling Italico, 92
Right Bank (Bordeaux), 148
Riley, Charles Valentine, 33
Rioja
  aerating and, 133
  aging requirements for, 438
  albariño in, 54
  classifications of, 439–441
  crianza, 438, 439–440
  foods of, 441
  gran reserva, 438, 439–441
  grapes of, 437
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 436–39
  map of, 433
  overview of, 433–36
  price and, 436
  quick sip on, 434
  reserva, 438, 439–440
  tempranillo in, 73
  visiting, 441
  wines to know from, 442–44
Ripeness levels
  for Austrian wine, 597–98
  for German wine, 554–55
Ripening, time for, 10
Riscal, Marqués de, 433, 441, 506
Riunite, 409
Riviera Ligure di Ponente, 407
Rkatsiteli, 53, 93, 642–43, 769, 912
ROAR, 727
Robinson, Jancis, 54, 55, 645–46
Robola, 93, 651
Rocios, 459
Rock, 22
Roditis, 651
Roederer, 192
Roederer Estates, 719
Rolin, Nicolas, 217
Rolland, Michel, 867, 888
Rolle (vermentino), 93, 238, 296, 307
Romanée-Conti, 210
Romanée-Conti, Domaine de la, 67, 210
Romanée-St. Vivant, 210
Rondinella, 93, 352, 353
Rootstocks, 30–31, 32–34, 747, 865
Rosé
  in Austria, 616
  in Germany, 549
  in Loire, 269–270
  in Provence, 306
  in southern Rhône, 251, 256
  Spanish, 439
Rosé Cabernet d’Anjou, 270
Rosé Champagne, 188
Rosé d’Anjou, 269–270
Rosemount, 825
Rossese, 93
Rossese di Dolceacqua, 407
Rosso di Montalcino, 377, 390
Rosso di Montepulciano, 377, 391–92
Roter veltliner, 93
Rotgipfler, 93, 605
Rothschild, Jacob, 630
Rothschild, Philippe de, 695, 697
Rothschild family, 866
Rotten egg aroma, 113
Rotting onion aroma, 113
Rouge du pays, 620
Roumier, Domaine, 205
Roupnel, Gaston, 210
Roussanne, 93, 236, 238, 239, 243–44, 296, 678
Royal Tokaji Wine Company, 630
Rubbing alcohol aroma, 113
Ruby cabernet, 93
Rueda, 506–07
Ruländer. see Grauburgunder
Russian River Valley, 709, 710
Ruta del Vino, 806
Rutherford, 699
S
Saccharomyces yeasts, 461
Saffron, 446
Sagrantino, 93
Sagrantino di Montefalco, 411, 412
Saintsbury, George, 71, 243
Salice Salentino, 416
Salinas Valley, 726
Salins, Guigone de, 217
Salmanazar, 187
Salmon, 761
Salon, 189
Salta, 888
Samant, Rajeev, 922
Sämling, 94, 594
Sancerre, 119, 263–66
Sánchez Romate, 468
Sand, 25
Sanford & Benedict, 737
Sangiovese
  in Argentina, 884
  beef and, 394
  brunello di Montalcino and, 387–88
  in California, 681
  Chianti Classico and, 386–87
  description of, 68
  in Italy, 326
  Super Tuscans and, 381
  in Texas, 784
  in Tuscany, 375–76, 378–79
  vino nobilo di
    Montepulciano and, 391
Santa Barbara County, 18, 735
Santa Cruz Mountains, 724–25
Santa Lucia Highlands, 726
Santa Maria Valley, 735, 736–37
Santa Trinità Mediterranea, 324–25
Santa Ynez Valley, 735, 736–37
Santiago Ruiz, 487
Santorini, 647, 654–55
Saperavi, 94, 642–43, 912
Sardinia, 417, 422, 968
Sárga muskotály, 626–27, 632
Sassicaia, 56, 329–330, 382, 383
Saumagen, 581
Sauternes
 classifications of, 150, 969
 climate and, 141
 as leading appellation, 147
 overview of, 157–161
 pairing with food, 120
 sémillon in, 70
 serving, 129
 sugar in, 15
Sauternes-style wines, 693
Sauvignon blanc in Australia, 828
 in Austria, 593, 594, 595, 615, 616
 in Bordeaux, 145, 147
 in California, 674, 677, 678, 680, 684–85
 in Canada, 811, 813
 in Chile, 866, 869, 872, 873
 cooking with, 119
 description of, 68–69
 dessert wines from, 693
 in Friuli, 366, 367, 369
 in Hungary, 626
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
 in Loire, 262, 263
 in New Zealand, 849–850, 851, 852, 854–55
  pairing with food, 118
  in Provence, 307
  in Rioja, 437
  in South Africa, 896, 898, 900–901
  in Texas, 784, 785
  in Tuscany, 377, 378
  in Uruguay, 888
  in Washington State, 745, 748
Sauvignon gris, 94, 147, 866
Sauvignon musqué, 685
Sauvignon vert, 94, 866, 869, 873
Sauvignonasse. see Sauvignon vert
Savagnin, 53, 55, 61, 94
Savatiano, 94, 651, 653
Savennières, 268–69
Scallops, 491
Scheurebe, 94, 550, 551, 581, 587, 589, 610
Schiava, 94, 403
Schilcher, 616
Schioppettino, 94, 365, 366, 367, 369
Schist, 25, 512–13
Schloss Johannisberg, 573, 574
Schnapps, 616
Schramsberg Vineyards, 692, 705
Screw caps, 133
Screwpull, 131
Scripps Institute, 21
Scuppernong, 95, 667, 791
Seafood, 466–67, 488, 490–91, 527, 658, 902
Sec, 177, 182, 270
Second wines, 166
Sediment, 114, 133–34
Sedimentary rock, 22
Sekt, 551, 559–560, 592
Selbach, Johannes, 549
Selbach-Oster, 549
Sélection de grains nobles (SGN), 129, 281, 287–88
Sémillon
  in Australia, 824, 825, 828, 831–32
  in Bordeaux, 145, 147
  in California, 678
  in China, 912
  description of, 69–70
  dessert wines from, 693
  in Provence, 307
  sauvignon blanc and, 69, 70
  serving, 129
  in Washington State, 745
Semisweet, 14
Seppelt, 832, 840
Seppeltsfield, 836
Sercial, 95, 533, 534–35
Set of flowers, 18, 22
Settling process, 44
Setúbal, 513, 542
Seyval blanc, 95, 769, 770
Shafer, 705
Shale, 25
Shandong Province, 913
Shanxi Province, 914
Sherry
  amontillado, 461, 462
  chilling, 464
  cooking, 467
  cooking with, 119
  cream, 461, 463, 464
  description of, 455–56
  fino, 460–61, 462, 465–66
  flor and, 460–61
  freshness and, 465–66
  grapes of, 457
  manzanilla, 460–61, 462, 465–66
  Moors and, 465
  name of, 457
  old and rare, 465
  oloroso, 461, 463, 464
  palo cortado, 462–63
  Pedro Ximénez (PX), 461, 463, 464
  process of making, 458–461, 464
  quick sip on, 456
  serving, 129
  styles of, 458, 462–63
  wines to know, 470–72
  see also Jerez
Sherry vinegar, 467
Sherry-style wines, in Australia, 836
Shiraz
  in Australia, 824, 825, 829, 833–35, 837, 838
  cooking with, 119
  description of, 72
  in South Africa, 896, 898
  sparkling, 832
  see also Syrah
Show Reserve, 827
Sichel Liebfraumilch, 559
Sichuan Province, 916
Sicily, 417–422, 968
Siegerrebe, 748
Sierra Foothills, 723
Silex, 25, 265
Silt, 25
Silvaner, 95, 550, 551, 559, 587
Simon, Jacques, 181
Simonsberg, 899
Sisseck, Peter, 447
Sivi pinot, 95
Slate, 25, 566
Slavery, 893–94
Slovenia, 423–27
Smaragd, 604–05
Smart, Richard, 852
Smelling, 102–05, 127
  see also Aroma, Assessing
Smith, Luke, 812
Smoke taint, 43
Snake River Valley, 802
Sniffing, 105
Soave, 350, 351, 353, 354–56
Sobon Estate, 723
Sobretable, 458
SOE Nongken, 911
Sogrape, 541
Soil
  about, 26–28
  types of, 24–25
Solera Madeira, 536
Solera process, 421, 458–460
Soles, Rollin, 760
Somersal, Laura, 707
Somló, 625–26
Sommeliers, 138
Sommer, Richard, 754
Sonnenuhr (Sundial) vineyards, 567–68
Sonoma Coast, California, 709, 711
Sonoma County
  description of, 706–711
  name of, 707
  visiting, 710
  wines to know from, 712–15
Sonoma Mountain, 711
Sonoma Valley, 709, 711
Sorì San Lorenzo, 336
Sorì Tildin, 336
Sound, taste and, 183
Sousão, 95, 514, 541
South Arica
  foods of, 902
  grapes of, 898
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 899–901
  map of, 892
  minerals from, 900
  most important wines of, 896
  overview of, 893–98
  quick sip on, 894
  visiting, 901
  wine laws in, 929–930
  wines to know from, 903–05
South Australia, 836–38
South Central Coast
  description of, 735–38
 visiting, 737
 wines to know from, 739–742
Southern Regions (Chile), 869
Spacing of vines, 35–36
Spain
 Basque region, 501–02
 Bierzo, 502, 504
 Calatayud, 504
 Campo de Borja, 504
 Castilla-la Mancha, 505
 Jerez, 455–472
 Jumilla, 506
 Lanzarote, 503
 map of, 428
 overview of, 429–432
 Penedès, 473–484
 Priorat, 495–500
 Rías Baixas, 485–494
 Ribera del Duero, 445–454
 Rioja, 433–444
 Rueda, 506–07
 Toro, 507
 wine laws in, 925
 wine terms of, 957–959
 see also individual regions for further breakdown
Spanna, 95, 333, 338–39
Sparkling wine
 in Alsace, 281–82
 Asti, 343–44
 in Australia, 825, 832, 840
 brachetto, 343
 in Brazil, 870
  in California, 690–93
  in Canada, 813
  in Carneros, 705
  English, 188
  in Germany, 559–560
  in Languedoc-Roussillon, 298
  in Loire, 268
  in Lombardy, 404–05
  in New Mexico, 801
  in New York State, 769
  in New Zealand, 851
  in Portugal, 542
  Prosecco, 356
  red, 832
  in Sonoma County, 710
  in South Africa, 896, 901
  Vouvray, 272
  in Washington State, 745
Spätburgunder, 95, 550, 551, 575–76, 581, 586, 587, 605
Spätlese, 554
Speakeasies, 669
Species, grape, 58
Spence, Charles, 183
Sperss, 336
Splendid Table, The (Kasper), 407–08
Split, 187
Spring Mountain District, 698–99
Spumante, 331, 402–03
Spurrier, Steven, 679
St. George. see Agiorgitiko
St. Georgener, 61
St. Helena, 699
St. Jean, Chateau, 693
St. Laurent, 93–94, 594, 595, 597, 611
St. Macaire, 94
St.-Amour, 230
St.-Chinian, 301
St.-Émilion, 93, 147, 149, 150, 152, 161–62, 163, 167
St.-Estèphe, 147, 149, 153, 155
St.-Joseph, 236, 241, 242
St.-Julien, 147, 149, 153, 154
St.-Nicolas-de-Bourgueil, 270–72
Sta. Rita Hills, 735, 737
Stag’s Leap, 678–79
Stags Leap District, 699
Stavroto, 95, 651
Ste. Genevieve Winery, 783
Ste. Michelle, Chateau, 745–46, 749
Steele Wines, 717
Stefáni, 650
Steiner, Rudolph, 34, 267
Steinfeder, 604
Stellenbosch Farmer’s Winery, 901
Stems, 239
Stony Hill, 682–83
Storage, 125–27
Stories Behind Sonoma Valley Place Names, The (Dawson), 707
Storks, 284
Stress, 21
Strohwein, 611
Structure, 12
Styria, 615–16
Subirat, 478
Subirat parent, 95, 475
Sugar
  added, 52
  body and, 106, 108
  fermentation and, 10
  as preservative, 127
  residual, 14–15
  in sweet wines, 52
Sula Vineyards, 922
Sulfites, 41
Sulfur compounds, 117
Sulfur dioxide, 112
Sultaniye, 95
Sunlight, 127
Super Tuscans, 68, 376, 377, 379, 380–85
Supertasters, 111
Sur lie, 45, 48
Survivor vines, 831
Sustainable farming, 35
Sutter Home, 75, 690, 723
Swan Valley, 840
Sweet (term), 14, 15, 182
Sweet and Fortified Wine Association, 14
Sweet wines
  in Australia, 835–36
  Austrian, 597–98, 609–11
  in Friuli, 371
  in Loire, 269
  making of, 51–52
  in Mosel, 568
  in New York State, 772
  in southern Rhône, 251
  see also Dessert Wines; individual types
Sweetness, 14–15
Swirling, 104–05
Switzerland, 619–621
Sylvaner, 285, 402, 620
Syrah
    in California, 674, 677, 680, 681, 687–88, 689
    in Canada, 811, 813
    in Chile, 866
    in China, 912
    description of, 70–72. see also Shiraz
    in Germany, 550, 551–52
    in Greece, 653
    grenache and, 61
    in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
    in New Zealand, 851, 852
    in northern Rhône, 236, 237, 239, 243–44
    in Oregon, 759
    in Priorat, 498
    in Provence, 307
    in Rhône, 238
    in South Africa, 896, 898, 901
    in South Central Coast, 738
    in southern Rhône, 236, 252, 253, 256
    in Texas, 784, 785
    in Washington State, 743, 745, 748
Szamorodni, 628, 636
Szürkebarát, 95, 627, 628
T
Tablas Creek Vineyard, 732, 734
Table Mountain, 896, 899
Tabor, George, 804
Tabor Hill Winery, 803
Taittinger, 192
Taittinger, Clovis, 189
Talley Vineyards, 733
Tamm, Curtis, 727
Tango, 883
Tanks, temperature-controlled stainless-steel, 42
Tannat, 95–96, 888
Tannin, 12–14, 38, 44, 49, 57, 127, 336–38, 685
Tapas, 458, 466–67
Tartaric acid, 11, 114
Tarte tatin, 268
Tartrates, 114
Tasaki, Shinya, 917
Tasman, Abel, 839, 850
Tasmania, 839
Taste, gender and, 111
Taste buds, 108, 109
Tastes, considering, 108–111, 114
Tastevins, 106
Tasting wines
  assessing aroma, 102–06
  confirming color, 114
  considering tastes, 108–111, 114
  descriptions and, 110–11
  feeling texture, 108
  gauging body weight, 106, 108
  gender and, 110
  order and, 103
  overview of, 101–02
Taurasi, 415
Taurino, 416
Tavel, 248, 249, 251, 256
Taxes, 532
Tazzelenghe, 96, 365, 366, 367, 369
Tchelistcheff, André, 746
Temperance movement, 768, 769, 850, 922
  see also Abstinence; Prohibition
Temperature
  aroma and, 104
  for harvesting, 43
  for serving, 130
  storage and, 126
  swings of, 21–22
Temperature-controlled stainless steel tanks, 42, 44
Tempier, Domaine, 307
Templeton Gap, 734
Tempranillo
  in Argentina, 884
  description of, 72–73
  minerality of, 107
  popularity of, 432
  in Priorat, 498
  in Ribera del Duero, 445–46
  in Rioja, 437, 438–39
  in Texas, 784, 785
Tempranillo blanco, 437
Teran, 425, 426
  see also Terrano
Teroldego, 96, 403
Terra rossa, 25
Terrano, 96
Terrantez, 96, 533, 534, 535
Terret noir, 96, 238, 296
Terroir, 17, 137, 144, 201, 548–49
Tesgüino, 783
Texas
  foods of, 786–87
  grapes of, 784
  land and grapes of, 784–86
  map of, 781
  most important wines of, 785
  number of vineyards in, 670
  overview of, 781–83
  quick sip on, 782
  visiting, 786
  wines to know from, 788–790
Texas Hill Country, 784–85
Texture, feeling, 108
Theise, Terry, 7–8, 595
Thompson seedless, 96, 678–79
Thun, Maria, 34
Tianjin, 913
Tibouren, 96, 307
Tignanello, 329–330, 383–84
Tinta barroca, 96, 514, 515, 538, 541
Tinta cão, 96–97, 541
Tinta da barca, 541
Tinta de Toro, 507
Tinta del país, 73, 96, 445, 448
Tinta del Toro, 73, 96
Tinta francisca, 96
Tinta negra mole, 96, 533, 534
Tinta roriz, 96, 514, 515, 538, 541
Tinto cão, 514, 515, 538
Tinto fino, 97, 445, 448, 449
Tocai Friulano. see Friulano
Tokaj-Hegyalja, 623, 624, 625, 631
Tokaji, 628–636
Tokaji Aszú, 129, 574, 624, 625, 628, 629, 630, 631–35
Tokaji Aszú Esszencia, 628, 629, 634, 635
Tokaji Esszencia, 628, 629, 634–35
Toni Jost, 588
Topaque, 825, 835, 840
Torcolato, 351
Torgiano rosso riserva, 411
Toro, 507
Toro Albalá, 459
Torres, 474, 482
Torres family, 866
Torrontés, 97, 882, 884, 888
Torrontés Riojano, 881, 888
Torrontés Sanjuanino, 881
Tot system, 897
Touraine Rouge, 272
Touriga franca, 97, 514, 515, 538, 541
Touriga nacional, 97, 514, 515, 538, 541, 542
Traisental DAC, 599
Trajadura, 97, 538, 540
Traminer, 97, 402, 403, 594, 595, 610, 616
Tramini, 627
Trans-Pecos, 784–85
Tre Venezie, 365
Treasury Wine Estates, 825
Trebbiano, 97, 378, 410, 411
Trebbiano d’Abruzzo, 413
Trebbiano di Lugana, 405
Trebbiano di Soave, 352, 353
Trebbiano Toscano, 352, 379, 383
Treixadura, 487
  see also trajadura
Trellising, 35
Trentino-Alto Adige, 60, 342, 402–04
Trepat, 98, 475, 478
Tribidrag, 75, 416, 690
Trichloroanisole (TCA), 113, 133
Trigeminal nerve, 107, 108
Trimbach, 284
Trimethyldihydronaphthalene (TDN), 557
Trincadeira preta, 98, 538, 542
Trocken, 554
Trockenbeerenauslesen (TBA), 15, 67, 129, 548, 555, 597
Trollinger, 98, 551
Trulli, 416–17
Tufa, 25
Turner, William, 138
Turruntés, 437
Tuscany
  brunello de Montalcino, 387–390
  Carmignano, 392–93
  Chianti, 380, 382–85
  Chianti Classico, 380, 385–87
  DOCGs of, 968
  foods of, 395–96
  grapes of, 378
  land, grapes, and vineyards of, 377–380
  map of, 375
  most important wines of, 377
  overview of, 375–76
  quick sip on, 376
  sangiovese in, 68
  Super Tuscans, 380–85
  vernaccia di San Gimignano, 393
  vin santo, 393–95
  vino nobilo di Montepulciano, 391–92
  visiting, 389
  wines to know from, 397–400
Twillie, Cuthbert J., 131
Txakoli, 502
Txomin Etaniz, 502
Tyrrell’s, 70, 832
U
Ue, 328
Ugni blanc, 98, 147, 238, 307, 316, 319
Ull de llebre, 475, 476
Umami, 105, 108–9
Umbria, 410–12, 971
Unico, 445, 451
United Kingdom Vineyards Association, 188
United States
  American Viticultural Areas and, 672
  Arizona, 800
  California, 673–742
  Colorado, 804
  growth of wine industry in, 666
  Idaho, 802
  Madeira in, 531–32
  map of, 664
  Michigan, 803
  Missouri, 800–801
  New Jersey, 804
  New Mexico, 801
  New York State, 767–780
  Oregon, 753–766
  overview of, 665–672
  Pennsylvania, 802
  Texas, 781–790
  vineyard locations, 670
  Virginia, 791–98
  Washington State, 743–752
  wine laws in, 927–28
  see also individual states for further breakdown
Unwin, Tim, 783
Uruguay, 888
U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (BATF), 671, 672
Uva di Troia, 416
V
Vaccarèse, 98, 238
Vacqueyras, 248, 249, 255–56
Val, Clos du, 679
Val Verde Winery, 782
Valdiguié, 98
Valencia, 63
Valentini, 413
Valle Central, 864, 869, 871
Vallée de la Marne, 180
Valpolicella, 350, 351, 358–59
Valtellina, 406
Van Riebeeck, Jan, 893–94
Vanillin, 47
Varietal character, 5
Variety of grapes, 53–54
Vatican City, 325
VDP (Verband Deutscher Prädikatsweingüter), 553, 556–59, 576
Vega-Sicilia, 446, 447, 448, 451, 631
Vendange tardive (VT), 129, 281, 287–88
Veneto
 amarone, 356–58
 Bardolino, 358–59
 DOCGs of, 968
 grapes of, 352
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 351–59
 most important wines of, 351
 overview of, 349–351
 Prosecco, 350, 351, 356
 quick sip on, 350
 Soave, 350, 354–56
 Valpolicella, 350, 358–59
 visiting, 358
 wines to know from, 360–62
Veraison, 19, 22
Verdejo, 98, 437, 506–07
Verdelho, 98, 533, 534, 535, 825, 828, 840–41
Verdello, 98, 410
Verdicchio bianco, 98
Verduzzo, 98
Verduzzo de Ramandolo, 367, 371
Verduzzo friulano, 366
Vermentino, 98, 238, 382, 407, 422
Vermouth, 341
Vernaccia, 61, 98–99, 378
Vernaccia di Oristano, 422
Vernaccia di San Gimignano, 329, 376, 377, 379, 393
Vernatsch, 403
Vernay, Georges, 242
Vespaiola, 99, 352, 353
Vespolina, 334
Veuve Clicquot, 176, 192
Victoria, 839–840
Vidal, 99, 769, 770
Vidal blanc, 794, 795, 811, 813
Vidiano, 99
Vieilles Vignes, 252
Vienna, 599, 617–18
Vigneron, 137, 201
Vignoles, 99, 769, 770
Vigor, 20
Villa de Cappezzana, 393
Village wines, 202
Vin brulè, 405
Vin de Constance, 895
Vin de pays, 142
Vin de Pays d’Oc, 297–98
Vin doux naturels, 299
Vin gris, 64
Vin santo, 129, 377, 379, 393–95
Vin Villa, 809
Viña Carmen, 874
Viña Sol, 482
Vinding-Diers, Peter, 630
Vinegar, 117
  aroma of, 113
  balsamic, 408
  sherry, 467
Vineyard 29, 55
Vinhão, 99, 538
Vinho verde, 513, 539–540
Vinhos Barbeito, 536
Vinhos da roda, 533
Vino nobilo di Montepulciano, 68, 330, 377, 391–92
Vino santo, 404
Vins de garde, 126
Vinsánto, 647, 655
Vintage dates, 124–25
Vintage Madeira, 536
Vintage Tunina, 368
Vintners Quality Assurance (VQA), 813
Viognier
 in Australia, 825, 828
 in California, 677, 678
 in Canada, 811, 813
 description of, 73–74
 in Edna Valley, 733
 in Languedoc-Roussillon, 296
 pairing with food, 118
 in Portugal, 540
 in Provence, 307
 in Rhône, 236, 238, 239, 240, 241–42
 in Texas, 784, 785
 in Virginia, 794, 795
 in Washington State, 745
Viosinho, 99, 514, 538
Virginia
 grapes of, 795
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 793–94
 map of, 791
 most important wines of, 794
 number of vineyards in, 670
 overview of, 791–93
 quick sip on, 791
 visiting, 792
  wines to know from, 796–98
Virginia Dare, 667
Viticulture
  biodynamic, 34
  climate and, 17–21
  clones and, 30–32
  drainage and, 27
  farming for flavor, 34–36
  frost and, 22–23
  matching grapes to ground, 28–30
  organic, 35
  rootstocks and, 32–34
  soil and, 24–28
  stress and, 21
  sustainable, 35
  temperature swings and, 21–22
  water and, 22–23
  wind and, 23, 26
Vitis amurensis, 914, 915–16
Vitis berlandieri, 34
Vitis labrusca, 58
Vitis riparia, 34
Vitis rupestris, 34
Vitis vinifera, 26, 30–31, 34, 58, 676, 769, 771, 772–73, 915–16
Vitovska, 99, 366
Viura, 99, 437, 439
Volatile acidity (V.A.), 11, 113
Volcanic, 25
Volstead Act, 668–69, 677
  see also Prohibition
Voltaire, 175
Vougeot, Clos du, 204–05, 213
Vouillamoz, José, 26, 54, 55, 66, 645–46
Vouvray, 129, 270, 272–73
W
Wagner, Jurgen, 7
Wagner, Rudolf, 109
Wairarapa/Martinborough, 854
Walla Walla Valley, 744, 745, 749
Walsh, Brian, 825
Warning labels, 671
Washington State
 AVAs in, 744
 grapes of, 748
 land, grapes, and vineyards of, 746–49
 map of, 743
 merlot and, 63
 most important wines of, 745
 number of vineyards in, 670
 overview of, 743–46
 quick sip on, 744
 visiting, 749
 wines to know from, 750–52
Water, 22–23
Waters, Thomas, 841
Weather. see Climate Weinbach, Domaine, 284
Adolf Weingart, 588
Weinviertel DAC, 599
Weissburgunder
 in Austria, 594, 595, 605, 616
 description of, 99
 in Germany, 550, 551, 581, 587
 in sekt, 559
Welch’s, 775
Welschriesling, 99, 594, 595, 605, 610, 616
Wente, 731
Western Australia, 840–41
Western Cape, 893–95, 899
Wet cardboard aroma, 113
Wetmore, Charles, 685, 731–32
White truffles, 334, 340, 345
White wine
  aging of, 283
  grapes for, 54, 57–61, 63, 68, 69–70, 73–74
  making of, 43–45, 48
  pairing with food, 118
  popularity of, 70
  serving, 129
  see also individual types
White zinfandel, 75
Wickham, John, 776
Wiener Gemischter Satz DAC, 599
Wienke, Carl, 131
Willamette Valley, 755–59
Wind, 23, 26
Wine
  building blocks of, 9–15
  buying, 121–24
  cooking with, 119
  nine attributes of, 4–8
  pairing with food, 115–120
  readiness of, 128, 130
  storing, 125–27
  tasting, 101–114
  writing about, 138
  see also individual types
Wine and Agriculture Industry Ethical Trade Association (WIETA), 897
Wine and the Vine (Unwin), 783
“Wine ghetto,” 736
Wine Grapes (Robinson, Harding, and Vouillamoz), 54, 55, 646
Wine Regions of America, The (Baxevanis), 70
Wine terms
 French, 950–54
 general, 931–950
 German and Austrian, 960–64
 Hungarian, 964
 Italian, 954–57
 Portuguese, 959–960
 Spanish, 957–59
Wineglasses. see Glassware
Winemaking
 chaptalization and, 52
 history of, 37
 oak barrels for, 41–42, 46–47, 48–51
 off-dry wine, 51–52
 origins of, 141
 red wine, dry, 38–43
 sweet wine, 51–52
 white wine, dry, 43–45, 48
 wine color and, 38
Wines of the Rhône, The (Livingstone-Learmonth), 254
Winiarski, Warren, 679
Wolf Blass, 825
Woodburne, Lloyd, 745
Woodhouse, John, 421
Wyndham, 825
Wynns, 825
X
Xarel-lo, 99, 475, 476, 478
Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, 916
Xinomavro, 99–100, 651, 652–53
Y
Yakima Valley, 744, 749
Yalumba, 74
Yamhill-Carlton, 759
Yeasts
    ambient vs. cultured, 39
    Champagne and, 184, 185–86
    fermentation and, 37
    role of, 10
    sherry and, 460–61
    see also Fermentation
[yellow tail], 826
Yield, 36
York Mountain, 732–34
Yquem, Château d’, 150, 160, 574, 732
Yunnan Province, 916
Z
Žametovka, 100
Zaria, 426
Zéta, 100, 627, 632
Zibibbo, 100, 420
Zierfandler, 100, 605
Zind Humbrecht, Domaine, 284
Zinfandel
    blends with, 689–690
    in California, 674, 676, 677, 680, 681, 688–690
    cooking with, 119
    description of, 74–75
    pairing with food, 118
 in Paso Robles, 734
 in Sonoma County, 711
Zweigelt
 in Austria, 593, 594, 595, 596–97, 605, 611
 description of, 100
 in Hungary, 624, 627, 628
                                        PHOTO CREDITS
STOCK PHOTOGRAPHY: AGE FOTOSTOCK—César Lucas Abreu: p. 224; Jerûnimo Alba: p. 316; Galyna
Andrushko: p. 718; Arco/J. Kruse: p. 355; Eric Baccega: p. 173; Rua Castilho: p. 483; Angelo Cavalli: pp. 656, 812;
CCOphotostock_KMN: p. 744; Jean-Marc Charles: p. 370; Gianalberto Cigolini: p. 363; Classic Vision: p. 774;
CSP_Nneirda: p. 37; J. D. Dallet: pp. 159, 167, 314; Danilo Donadoni: p. 342; Danny Lerner Studio, Ltd.: p. 168; Steve
Dunwell: p. 380; Food Image Source: p. 118; Patrick Forget: p. 293; Robert Francis: p. 841; Owen Franken/CORBIS: p.
220; Funkystock: p. 620; Giovanni Gagliardi: p. 382; André Gonçalves: p. 406; Christian Goupi: p. 215; Henning
Hattendorf/imageBROKER: p. 575; Hoffmann Photography: p. 559; Hendrik Holler: pp. 552, 621; Herve Hughes: p.
232; Danuta Hyniewska: p. 619; Keller & Keller Photo: p. 787 (top); Christian Kober: p. 916; Javier Larrea: p. 490;
Herbert Lehmann: p. 340; Nicolas Leser: p. 289; Horst Lieber: p. 377; Sabine Lubenow: p. 353; Melba: p. 440; Andrew
Michael: p. 357 (bottom); Philippe Michel: p. 416; Paolo Gallo Modena: p. 332; Martin Moxter/imageBROKER: p. 551;
Domingo Leiva Nicolas: p. 505; George Ostertag: p. 761; Lynne Otter: p. 358; Aldo Pavan: p. 915; Carlos S. Pereyra:
pp. 9, 473; Jordi Puig: p. 495; Jose Fuste Raga: pp. 388, 564, 914; Mike Randolph: p. 445; Rivière: p. 120; Norbert
Scanella: p. 305; James Schwabel: p. 768; Shaffer Smith Photography: p. 40; Hans-Peter Siffert: p. 357; Andreas
Strauss: p. 620; SuperStock: p. 786; K. Thomas: p. 618; Lucas Vallecillos: p. 617; White Star/Monica
Gumm/imageBROKER: p. 540; Peter Widmann: p. 615; Jochem Wijnands: p. 469; Wilmar: p. 74; Hans Zaglitsch: p.
921; Zoonar/Rostislav Gli: p. 336. ALAMY—AA World Travel Library: p. 479; Aflo Co. Ltd.: pp. 918, 919; Rossella
Apostoli: p. 391; Aurora Photos: p. 79; Paul Bernhardt: p. 537; Cephas Picture Library: pp. 237 (bottom), 272, 368, 387
506, 726, 816 (bottom); Maria Galan Clik: p. 452; Cosmo Condina North America: p. 814; Richard Cummins: p. 75;
Luis Dafos: p. 642 (top); Fine Wine Stock: p. 736; Rob Greebon: p. 785; Arina Habich: p. 804; Hackenberg-Photo-
Cologne: p. 131; Peter Horree: p. 396; Isifa Image Service s.r.o.: p. 477; Niels van Kampenhaut: p. 255; Per
Karlsson/Robert Landau: p. 717; LOOK Die Bildagentur der Fotografen GmbH: p. 474; LS Black and White Collection:
p. 284; Malcolm Park Wine and Vineyards: p. 250; Werner Otto: p. 562; Magdalena Paluchowska: p. 643; Nicolas
Paquet: p. 816 (top); Sean Pavone: pp. 512, 920; Realy Easy Star/Tullio Valente: p. 367; REDA &CO srl: p. 328; Edwin
Remsberg: p. 795; Robert Harding Picture Library Ltd.: p. 523 (top); RosaIreneBetancourt 6: p. 803; Ian Shaw: p. 150;
Universal Images Group (Lake County Discovery Museum): p. 775; Michael Ventura: p. 799. FOTOLIA—alexpoison:
p. 279; ChantalS: p. 301; Martin Ferrier: p. 154; Sergii Figurnyi: p. 324; ImageArt: p. 294; julia252: p. 308; Kondor83:
p. 403; PHB.cz: p. 280; samott: p. 392; Pavlo Vakhrushev: p. 349. GETTY IMAGES—Peter Adams/Photolibrary RM:
p. 401; Jean-Marc Barrere/hemis.fr: p. 320; Bosca78/E+: p. 369 (top); Fabrice Dimier/Bloomberg: p. 318; Hill Street
Studios/Blend Images: p. 802; Paul S. Howell: p. 782; Francesco Iacobelli/AWL Images RM: p. 414; Owen Lexington:
p. 833; Lonely Planet Images: p. 364; Michael Melford/National Geographic Creative: p. 524; New York Daily News
Archive: p. 668; Chris Parker/Design Pics: p. 795; Peopleimages: p. 115; Photononstop RM: p. 315; Alex
Robinson/AWL Images RM: p. 485; John Storey/The LIFE Images Collection: p. 692; Vetta: p. 313.
COURTESY PHOTOGRAPHY VIA KAREN MACNEIL: Alana-Tokaj: p. 626. Bob Alder: p. 913. Kurt Ammann,
Star Lane Vineyard: p. 688. Antinori family: p. 329. Archive CRDOQ Priorat: p. 497. Christian Arial: pp. 248, 256. Jim
Auchew: pp. 378, 384. Ballochdale Estate Ltd: p. 850. Susana Bates for Drew Altizer: p. 671. Miha Batič: p. 4. Batič
Vineyards-Slovenia: pp. 54, 61. Bertani Winery, courtesy of Palm Bay International: p. 350. Bodega Alta Vista: p. 16;
Bodega Catena Zapata, Courtesy of Winebow: p. 880 (top). Don Brice: p. 835. Brittany Ferries: p. 297. Kimberly
Burfiend: pp. 907, 913. Elizabeth Caravati: pp. 18, 502, 625, 738. Stacey Carlo: pp. 327, 393, 411, 418, 419, 420. Ana
Paula Carvalho: p. 539. Casa Madero: p. 807. Beth Cash: pp. 180, 271. Castello di Bossi, Courtesy of Winebow: p. 395.
Castello di Fonterutoli, courtesy of Palm Bay International: p. 379, 385. Ceretto, Courtesy of Winebow: p. 337 (top).
chrisshanahan.com: p. 834. Cloudy Bay Vineyards: pp. 72, 853, 856. Cono Sur: pp. 864, 871 (top). Consejo Regulador
de las Denominaciones de Origen Jerez-Xerez-Sherry: pp. 46 (left), 431, 456, 461. Consejo Regulador Rias Baixas: p.
486. Conti Costanti: p. 390. Creation Wines: p. 128. Mark Davidson: p. 830 (top). Gilles Deschamps: pp. 298, 300.
Diageo Chateau & Estate Wines: p. 214. Domaine Clarence Dillon: pp. 149, 156. Domaine de L’Arlot (AXA Millesimes
Gestion): pp. 206, 211. Domaine Select Wine Estates: p. 325. Domaine Trevallon: p. 308. Domane Wachau: pp. 122,
604, 605. Dan and Vicki Dooling: pp. 679, 719. Joanne Dow: pp. 488, 657, 658. Dr. Konstantin Frank Wine Cellars: p.
773. Ernesto Catena Vineyards: p. 883. F. X. Pichler, courtesy of Palm Bay International: p. 593. Faber & Partner: pp.
59, 63, 71. Faber & Partner Duesseldorf: pp. 68, 599, 595, 611. Farnese Group: p. 60. Farnese Vini SrL: p. 413.
Fernando Fernandez: pp. 429, 448, 449, 450. Ferrari Winery, courtesy of Palm Bay International: pp. 326, 404. Rebecca
Fletcher: pp. 11, 15, 19, 104, 113, 126, 130. Owen Franken: pp. 164, 191, 228, 410. Georgian Wine Association: p. 641.
German Wine Institute, www.germanwines.de: pp. 553, 557, 560, 563, 585. Greek Wine Bureau: pp. 646, 647, 650, 655.
Simi Grewal: p. 287. Groot Constantia: pp. 894, 897. Jason Haas, Tablas Creek Vineyard: p. 733. Steve Haider: p. 610.
Timothy Hartley, British Chancellor of the Jurade: p. 162. Hotel Marques de Riscal, a Luxury Collection Hotel, Elciego:
p. 435. Richard Humphrys: pp. 828, 836. Hype House: p. 672. Gene Iverster/Studios on Main: pp. 2, 101, 111. J. Boutari
& Son Wineries: pp. 648, 652. Robert Janover: pp. 684, 707. Kanonkop Wine Estate: p. 899. Andy Katz: pp. 666, 686.
Katie Keeley: pp. 489, 503, 504. Eric Kelley, for Early Mountain Vineyards: p. 792. Kermit Lynch Wine Merchant: p.
230. Amanda Klein, Hearts and Horseshoes: p. 734. Kobrand Wine & Spirits: pp. 178, 283, 422, 510, 511, 515, 516,
517, 683. Valerie Lailheuge: p. 157. Domaine Laroche: p. 216. Jai Yin Liu, Chateau Palmer: p. 148. Valenti Llagostera:
p. 23. Long Shadows Vintners: p. 474. Cecile Loqmane: p. 153. Patria E. Lopez Lozano: p. 806. Steve Lumpkin, “Under
Prairie Skies”: p. 53. MAAL: p. 20. Karen MacNeil: pp. 32, 38, 124, 139, 140, 183, 185, 186, 188, 218, 219, 221, 262,
265, 266, 267, 269, 270, 273, 274, 464, 501, 509, 518, 827, 885. Madeira Wine Company: p. 531. Maisons Marques &
Domaines: pp. 191, 281. Marchesi de’ Frescobaldi: pp. 330, 394. Marques de Caceres Winery: p. 438. Curtis John
Marsh: pp. 157, 242, 576. Mas Doix: p. 496. Janis Miglavs www.jmiglavs.com: pp. 911, 912. Moët & Chandon: p. 177.
Jean-Marie Muron: p. 208. National Braai Day: p. 902. Michael Newsom, courtesy of Blue Danube Wine Co: p. 425.
Northwest Wines Ltd: pp. 589, 756, 758, 762, 574, 586. Numanthia: pp. 430, 432, 507. Kathy A. O’Neal: p. 73, 681.
RGA: p. 116. Riedel Crystal: pp. 45, 121. Rob Brown Photography, Fess Parker Winery: p. 675. Romantischer Rhein
Tourismus GmbH: p. 581. Royal Tokaji: pp. 630, 633, 634, 636. Rudi Wiest Selections: pp. 566, 567, 580 (top), 587.
Scala Dei Winery: pp. 56, 106, 495. Meredith Schlacter: pp. 867, 872 (top). Schweiger Vineyards: p. 29. Seguin Moreau:
pp. 46, 47. Sogrape Vinhos S.A.: pp. 525, 526. Taylor Fladgate & Yeatman: p. 519. The Eyrie Vineyards: p. 754. The
Symington Family Estate: p. 520 (bottom). Ahin Thomas, Vintners’ Alliance: p. 70. Jamey Thomas: p. 724 (top).
Zabrine Tipton: pp. 27, 708 (top). Torbreck: p. 839. Vietti Winery: p. 339. Roberto Voerzio, Courtesy of Winebow: p.
335. David Waitz: p. 436. Lauren Watters: pp. 28, 199, 203, 237, 252, 345. Weingut Loimer: p. 598. Weingut Sattlerhof:
p. 616. Weingut Selbach-Oster: p. 568 (bottom). Williams Selyem Winery: p. 43. Matt Wilson: p. 865. winebc.com: p.
810. Wines of Chile: pp. 869, 873 (top), 874. winesofontario.org: pp. 809, 815. Wooing Tree Vineyard: p. 854 (top).
www.kvevri.org: p. 642 (bottom). www.vienna-unwrapped.com: p. 602. Joco Žnidaršič: pp. 424 (top), 426, 427.
                       ABOUT THE AUTHOR




Karen MacNeil is the only U.S. winner of every major wine award in the English
language, including the James Beard Outstanding Wine and Spirits Professional of the
Year (2004). She is the host of Wine, Food and Friends with Karen MacNeil (PBS
nationally); a writer whose work has appeared in The New York Times, Food & Wine,
Saveur, and Town & Country; and chairman emeritus of the Rudd Center for Professional
Wine Studies at the Culinary Institute of America in Napa Valley. As a consultant, Karen
creates wine seminars for corporate clients, including Lexus, Merrill Lynch, Disney, and
GE. She lives in St. Helena, California, and online at karenmacneil.com.
                                    Copyright © 2001, 2015 by Karen MacNeil
 All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be reproduced—mechanically, electronically, or by any other means,
including photocopying—without written permission of the publisher. Published simultaneously in Canada by Thomas
                                                 Allen & Son Limited.
                          Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available.
                                             ISBN 978-0-7611-8715-8
                                        Cover design by Jean-Marc Troadec
                                    COVER PHOTO: DAVID ARKY
                          GLASS: EISCH SKY SENSIS PLUS BURGUNDY GLASS
                         AUTHOR PHOTO: LOWELL DOWNEY OF ART & CLARITY
                                        MAPS BY ACCURAT
                           PHOTO CREDITS CAN BE FOUND ON PAGES 995–996
                                      WORKMAN PUBLISHING CO., INC.
                                            225 VARICK ST.
                                        NEW YORK, NY 10014-4381
                                           WORKMAN.COM
                      WORKMAN is a registered trademark of Workman Publishing Co., Inc.
